"A Narrow Girdle of Rough Stones and Crags,"

A narrow girdle of rough stones and crags, A rude and natural causeway, interposed Between the water and a winding slope Of copse and thicket, leaves the eastern shore Of Grasmere safe in its own privacy:

And there myself and two beloved Friends, One calm September morning, ere the mist Had altogether yielded to the sun,

Sauntered on this retired and difficult way.

----Ill suits the road with one in haste; but we Played with our time; and, as we strolled along, It was our occupation to observe

Such objects as the waves had tossed ashore--

Feather, or leaf, or weed, or withered bough, Each on the other heaped, along the line Of the dry wreck. And, in our vacant mood, Not seldom did we stop to watch some tuft Of dandelion seed or thistle's beard, That skimmed the surface of the dead calm lake, Suddenly halting now--a lifeless stand!

And starting off again with freak as sudden; In all its sportive wanderings, all the while, Making report of an invisible breeze

That was its wings, its chariot, and its horse, Its playmate, rather say, its moving soul.

--And often, trifling with a privilege Alike indulged to all, we paused, one now, And now the other, to point out, perchance To pluck, some flower or water-weed, too fair Either to be divided from the place

On which it grew, or to be left alone To its own beauty. Many such there are, Fair ferns and flowers, and chiefly that tall fern, So stately, of the queen Osmunda named; Plant lovelier, in its own retired abode On Grasmere's beach, than Naiad by the side Of Grecian brook, or Lady of the Mere, Sole-sitting by the shores of old romance.

--So fared we that bright morning: from the fields Meanwhile, a noise was heard, the busy mirth Of reapers, men and women, boys and girls.

Delighted much to listen to those sounds, And feeding thus our fancies, we advanced Along the indented shore; when suddenly, Through a thin veil of glittering haze was seen Before us, on a point of jutting land, The tall and upright figure of a Man

Attired in peasant's garb, who stood alone, Angling beside the margin of the lake.

"Improvident and reckless," we exclaimed,

"The Man must be, who thus can lose a day Of the mid harvest, when the labourer's hire





Is ample, and some little might be stored Wherewith to cheer him in the winter time."

Thus talking of that Peasant, we approached Close to the spot where with his rod and line He stood alone; whereat he turned his head To greet us--and we saw a Mam worn down By sickness, gaunt and lean, with sunken cheeks And wasted limbs, his legs so long and lean That for my single self I looked at them, Forgetful of the body they sustained.--

Too weak to labour in the harvest field, The Man was using his best skill to gain A pittance from the dead unfeeling lake That knew not of his wants. I will not say What thoughts immediately were ours, nor how The happy idleness of that sweet morn, With all its lovely images, was changed To serious musing and to self-reproach.

Nor did we fail to see within ourselves What need there is to be reserved in speech, And temper all our thoughts with charity.

--Therefore, unwilling to forget that day, My Friend, Myself, and She who then received The same admonishment, have called the place By a memorial name, uncouth indeed

As e'er by mariner was given to bay

Or foreland, on a new-discovered coast; And POINT RASH-JUDGMENT is the name it bears.

William Wordsworth





"A Whirl-Blast from Behind the Hill"

A Whirl-Blast from behind the hill

Rushed o'er the wood with startling sound; Then--all at once the air was still,

And showers of hailstones pattered round.

Where leafless oaks towered high above, I sat within an undergrove

Of tallest hollies, tall and green;

A fairer bower was never seen.

From year to year the spacious floor

With withered leaves is covered o'er, And all the year the bower is green.

But see! where'er the hailstones drop The withered leaves all skip and hop; There's not a breeze--no breath of air--

Yet here, and there, and everywhere

Along the floor, beneath the shade

By those embowering hollies made,

The leaves in myriads jump and spring, As if with pipes and music rare

Some Robin Good-fellow were there,

And all those leaves, in festive glee, Were dancing to the minstrelsy.

William Wordsworth





"Calm is all Nature as a Resting Wheel."

Calm is all nature as a resting wheel.

The kine are couched upon the dewy grass; The horse alone, seen dimly as I pass, Is cropping audibly his later meal:

Dark is the ground; a slumber seems to steal O'er vale, and mountain, and the starless sky.

Now, in this blank of things, a harmony, Home-felt, and home-created, comes to heal That grief for which the senses still supply Fresh food; for only then, when memory Is hushed, am I at rest. My Friends! restrain Those busy cares that would allay my pain; Oh! leave me to myself, nor let me feel The officious touch that makes me droop again.

William Wordsworth





"I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud"

I wandered lonely as a cloud

That floats on high o'er vales and hills, When all at once I saw a crowd,

A host, of golden daffodils;

Beside the lake, beneath the trees,

Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

Continuous as the stars that shine

And twinkle on the milky way,

They stretched in never-ending line

Along the margin of a bay:

Ten thousand saw I at a glance,

Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

The waves beside them danced; but they Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:

A poet could not but be gay,

In such a jocund company:

I gazed---and gazed---but little thought What wealth the show to me had brought: For oft, when on my couch I lie

In vacant or in pensive mood,

They flash upon that inward eye

Which is the bliss of solitude;

And then my heart with pleasure fills, And dances with the daffodils.

William Wordsworth





"It was an April morning: fresh and clear"

It was an April morning: fresh and clear The Rivulet, delighting in its strength, Ran with a young man's speed; and yet the voice Of waters which the winter had supplied Was softened down into a vernal tone.

The spirit of enjoyment and desire,

And hopes and wishes, from all living things Went circling, like a multitude of sounds.

The budding groves seemed eager to urge on The steps of June; as if their various hues Were only hindrances that stood between Them and their object: but, meanwhile, prevailed Such an entire contentment in the air That every naked ash, and tardy tree

Yet leafless, showed as if the countenance With which it looked on this delightful day Were native to the summer.--Up the brook I roamed in the confusion of my heart, Alive to all things and forgetting all.

At length I to a sudden turning came

In this continuous glen, where down a rock The Stream, so ardent in its course before, Sent forth such sallies of glad sound, that all Which I till then had heard, appeared the voice Of common pleasure: beast and bird, the lamb, The shepherd's dog, the linnet and the thrush Vied with this waterfall, and made a song, Which, while I listened, seemed like the wild growth Or like some natural produce of the air, That could not cease to be. Green leaves were here; But 'twas the foliage of the rocks--the birch, The yew, the holly, and the bright green thorn, With hanging islands of resplendent furze: And, on a summit, distant a short space, By any who should look beyond the dell, A single mountain-cottage might be seen.

I gazed and gazed, and to myself I said,

"Our thoughts at least are ours; and this wild nook, My EMMA, I will dedicate to thee."

----Soon did the spot become my other home, My dwelling, and my out-of-doors abode.

And, of the Shepherds who have seen me there, To whom I sometimes in our idle talk

Have told this fancy, two or three, perhaps, Years after we are gone and in our graves, When they have cause to speak of this wild place, May call it by the name of EMMA'S DELL.

William Wordsworth





"She Dwelt Among Untrodden Ways"

She dwelt among the untrodden ways

Beside the springs of Dove,

Maid whom there were none to praise

And very few to love:

A violet by a mosy tone

Half hidden from the eye!

---Fair as a star, when only one

Is shining in the sky.

She lived unknown, and few could know When Lucy ceased to be;

But she is in her grave, and, oh,

The difference to me!

William Wordsworth





"She Was a Phantom of Delight"

She was a phantom of delight

When first she gleamed upon my sight; A lovely Apparition, sent

To be a moment's ornament;

Her eyes as stars of Twilight fair;

Like Twilight's, too, her dusky hair; But all things else about her drawn

From May-time and the cheerful Dawn;

A dancing Shape, an Image gay,

To haunt, to startle, and way-lay.

I saw her upon a nearer view,

A Spirit, yet a Woman too!

Her household motions light and free, And steps of virgin liberty;

A countenance in which did meet

Sweet records, promises as sweet;

A Creature not too bright or good

For human nature's daily food;

For transient sorrows, simple wiles,

Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears and smiles.

And now I see with eye serene

The very pulse of the machine;

A Being breathing thoughtful breath,

A Traveler between life and death;

The reason firm, the temperate will,

Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill; A perfect Woman, nobly planned,

To warm, to comfort, and command;

And yet a Spirit still, and bright,

With something of angelic light.

William Wordsworth





"Strange Fits of Passion Have I Known"

Strange fits of passion have I known: And I will dare to tell,

But in the lover's ear alone,

What once to me befell.

When she I loved looked every day

Fresh as a rose in June,

I to her cottage bent my way,

Beneath an evening-moon.

Upon the moon I fixed my eye,

All over the wide lea;

With quickening pace my horse drew nigh Those paths so dear to me.

And now we reached the orchard-plot;

And, as we climbed the hill,

The sinking moon to Lucy's cot

Came near, and nearer still.

In one of those sweet dreams I slept, Kind Nature's gentlest boon!

And all the while my eye I kept

On the descending moon.

My horse moved on; hoof after hoof

He raised, and never stopped:

When down behind the cottage roof,

At once, the bright moon dropped.

What fond and wayward thoughts will slide Into a Lover's head!

"O mercy!" to myself I cried,

"If Lucy hould be dead!"

William Wordsworth





"Surprised by Joy--Impatient as the Wind"

Surprised by joy — impatient as the Wind I turned to share the transport--Oh! with whom But Thee, deep buried in the silent tomb, That spot which no vicissitude can find?

Love, faithful love, recalled thee to my mind--

But how could I forget thee? Through what power, Even for the least division of an hour, Have I been so beguiled as to be blind To my most grievous loss?--That thought's return Was the worst pang that sorrow ever bore, Save one, one only, when I stood forlorn, Knowing my heart's best treasure was no more; That neither present time, nor years unborn Could to my sight that heavenly face restore.

William Wordsworth





"The World Is To Much With Us; Late and Soon"

The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers: Little we see in Nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!

This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon; The winds that will be howling at all hours, And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers; For this, for everything, we are out of tune, It moves us not.--Great God! I'd rather be A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;

So might I, standing on this pleasant lea, Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn; Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea; Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.

William Wordsworth





"There is an Eminence,--of these our hills"

There is an Eminence,--of these our hills The last that parleys with the setting sun; We can behold it from our orchard-seat; And, when at evening we pursue out walk Along the public way, this Peak, so high Above us, and so distant in its height, Is visible; and often seems to send

Its own deep quiet to restore our hearts.

The meteors make of it a favourite haunt: The star of Jove, so beautiful and large In the mid heavens, is never half so fair As when he shines above it. 'Tis in truth The loneliest place we have among the clouds.

And She who dwells with me, whom I have loved With such communion, that no place on earth Can ever be a solitude to me,

Hath to this lonely Summit given my Name.

William Wordsworth





"Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower,"

Three years she grew in sun and shower, Then Nature said, "A lovelier flower On earth was never sown;

This Child I to myself will take;

She shall be mine, and I will make

A Lady of my own.

"Myself will to my darling be

Both law and impulse: and with me

The Girl, in rock and plain

In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, Shall feel an overseeing power

To kindle or restrain.

"She shall be sportive as the fawn That wild with glee across the lawn

Or up the mountain springs;

And her's shall be the breathing balm, And her's the silence and the calm

Of mute insensate things.

"The floating clouds their state shall lend To her; for her the willow bend;

Nor shall she fail to see

Even in the motions of the Storm

Grace that shall mold the Maiden's form By silent sympathy.

"The stars of midnight shall be dear To her; and she shall lean her ear

In many a secret place

Where rivulets dance their wayward round, And beauty born of murmuring sound

Shall pass into her face.

"And vital feelings of delight

Shall rear her form to stately height, Her virgin bosom swell;

Such thoughts to Lucy I will give

While she and I together live

Here in this happy dell."

Thus Nature spake---The work was done---

How soon my Lucy's race was run!

She died, and left to me

This heath, this calm, and quiet scene; The memory of what has been,

And never more will be.

William Wordsworth





"'Tis Said, That Some Have Died For Love"

'Tis said, that some have died for love: And here and there a churchyard grave is found In the cold north's unhallowed ground, Because the wretched man himself had slain, His love was such a grievous pain.

And there is one whom I five years have known; He dwells alone

Upon Helvellyn's side:

He loved--the pretty Barbara died;

And thus he makes his moan:

Three years had Barbara in her grave been laid When thus his moan he made:

"Oh, move, thou Cottage, from behind that oak!

Or let the aged tree uprooted lie,

That in some other way yon smoke

May mount into the sky!

The clouds pass on; they from the heavens depart.

I look--the sky is empty space;

I know not what I trace;

But when I cease to look, my hand is on my heart.

"Oh! what a weight is in these shades! Ye leaves, That murmur once so dear, when will it cease?

Your sound my heart of rest bereaves, It robs my heart of peace.

Thou Thrush, that singest loud--and loud and free, Into yon row of willows flit,

Upon that alder sit;

Or sing another song, or choose another tree.

"Roll back, sweet Rill! back to thy mountain-bounds, And there for ever be thy waters chained!

For thou dost haunt the air with sounds That cannot be sustained;

If still beneath that pine-tree's ragged bough Headlong yon waterfall must come,

Oh let it then be dumb!

Be anything, sweet Rill, but that which thou art now.

"Thou Eglantine, so bright with sunny showers, Proud as a rainbow spanning half the vale, Thou one fair shrub, oh! shed thy flowers, And stir not in the gale.

For thus to see thee nodding in the air, To see thy arch thus stretch and bend, Thus rise and thus descend,--

Disturbs me till the sight is more than I can dear."

The Man who makes this feverish complaint Is one of giant stature, who could dance Equipped from head to foot in iron mail.





Ah gentle Love! if ever thought was thine To store up kindred hours for me, thy face Turn from me, gentle Love! nor let me walk Within the sound of Emma's voice, nor know Such happiness as I have known to-day.

William Wordsworth





"With Ships the Sea was Sprinkled Far and Nigh,"

With ships the sea was sprinkled far and nigh, Like stars in heaven, and joyously it showed; Some lying fast at anchor in the road, Some veering up and down, one knew not why.

A goodly vessel did I then espy

Come like a giant from a haven broad; And lustily along the bay she strode, Her tackling rich, and of apparel high.

The ship was nought to me, nor I to her, Yet I pursued her with a lover's look; This ship to all the rest did I prefer: When will she turn, and whither? She will brook No tarrying; where she comes the winds must stir: On went she, and due north her journey took.

William Wordsworth





A Character

I marvel how Nature could ever find space For so many strange contrasts in one human face: There's thought and no thought, and there's paleness and bloom And bustle and sluggishness, pleasure and gloom.

There's weakness, and strength both redundant and vain; Such strength as, if ever affliction and pain Could pierce through a temper that's soft to disease, Would be rational peace--a philosopher's ease.

There's indifference, alike when he fails or succeeds, And attention full ten times as much as there needs; Pride where there's no envy, there's so much of joy; And mildness, and spirit both forward and coy.

There's freedom, and sometimes a diffident stare Of shame scarcely seeming to know that she's there, There's virtue, the title it surely may claim, Yet wants heaven knows what to be worthy the name.

This picture from nature may seem to depart, Yet the Man would at once run away with your heart; And I for five centuries right gladly would be Such an odd such a kind happy creature as he.

William Wordsworth





A Complaint

There is a change--and I am poor;

Your love hath been, nor long ago,

A fountain at my fond heart's door,

Whose only business was to flow;

And flow it did; not taking heed

Of its own bounty, or my need.

What happy moments did I count!

Blest was I then all bliss above!

Now, for that consecrated fount

Of murmuring, sparkling, living love, What have I? Shall I dare to tell?

A comfortless and hidden well.

A well of love--it may be deep--

I trust it is,--and never dry:

What matter? If the waters sleep

In silence and obscurity.

--Such change, and at the very door

Of my fond heart, hath made me poor.

William Wordsworth





A Narrow Girdle of Rough Stones and Crags, A narrow girdle of rough stones and crags, A rude and natural causeway, interposed Between the water and a winding slope Of copse and thicket, leaves the eastern shore Of Grasmere safe in its own privacy:

And there myself and two beloved Friends, One calm September morning, ere the mist Had altogether yielded to the sun,

Sauntered on this retired and difficult way.

----Ill suits the road with one in haste; but we Played with our time; and, as we strolled along, It was our occupation to observe

Such objects as the waves had tossed ashore--

Feather, or leaf, or weed, or withered bough, Each on the other heaped, along the line Of the dry wreck. And, in our vacant mood, Not seldom did we stop to watch some tuft Of dandelion seed or thistle's beard, That skimmed the surface of the dead calm lake, Suddenly halting now--a lifeless stand!

And starting off again with freak as sudden; In all its sportive wanderings, all the while, Making report of an invisible breeze

That was its wings, its chariot, and its horse, Its playmate, rather say, its moving soul.

--And often, trifling with a privilege Alike indulged to all, we paused, one now, And now the other, to point out, perchance To pluck, some flower or water-weed, too fair Either to be divided from the place

On which it grew, or to be left alone To its own beauty. Many such there are, Fair ferns and flowers, and chiefly that tall fern, So stately, of the queen Osmunda named; Plant lovelier, in its own retired abode On Grasmere's beach, than Naiad by the side Of Grecian brook, or Lady of the Mere, Sole-sitting by the shores of old romance.

--So fared we that bright morning: from the fields Meanwhile, a noise was heard, the busy mirth Of reapers, men and women, boys and girls.

Delighted much to listen to those sounds, And feeding thus our fancies, we advanced Along the indented shore; when suddenly, Through a thin veil of glittering haze was seen Before us, on a point of jutting land, The tall and upright figure of a Man

Attired in peasant's garb, who stood alone, Angling beside the margin of the lake.

"Improvident and reckless," we exclaimed,

"The Man must be, who thus can lose a day Of the mid harvest, when the labourer's hire





Is ample, and some little might be stored Wherewith to cheer him in the winter time."

Thus talking of that Peasant, we approached Close to the spot where with his rod and line He stood alone; whereat he turned his head To greet us--and we saw a Mam worn down By sickness, gaunt and lean, with sunken cheeks And wasted limbs, his legs so long and lean That for my single self I looked at them, Forgetful of the body they sustained.--

Too weak to labour in the harvest field, The Man was using his best skill to gain A pittance from the dead unfeeling lake That knew not of his wants. I will not say What thoughts immediately were ours, nor how The happy idleness of that sweet morn, With all its lovely images, was changed To serious musing and to self-reproach.

Nor did we fail to see within ourselves What need there is to be reserved in speech, And temper all our thoughts with charity.

--Therefore, unwilling to forget that day, My Friend, Myself, and She who then received The same admonishment, have called the place By a memorial name, uncouth indeed

As e'er by mariner was given to bay

Or foreland, on a new-discovered coast; And POINT RASH-JUDGMENT is the name it bears.

William Wordsworth





A Night Thought

Lo! where the Moon along the sky

Sails with her happy destiny;

Oft is she hid from mortal eye

Or dimly seen,

But when the clouds asunder fly

How bright her mien!

Far different we--a froward race,

Thousands though rich in Fortune's grace With cherished sullenness of pace

Their way pursue,

Ingrates who wear a smileless face

The whole year through.

If kindred humours e'er would make

My spirit droop for drooping's sake,

From Fancy following in thy wake,

Bright ship of heaven!

A counter impulse let me take

And be forgiven.

William Wordsworth





A Night-Piece

------The sky is overcast

With a continuous cloud of texture close, Heavy and wan, all whitened by the Moon, Which through that veil is indistinctly seen, A dull, contracted circle, yielding light So feebly spread, that not a shadow falls, Chequering the ground--from rock, plant, tree, or tower.

At length a pleasant instantaneous gleam Startles the pensive traveller while he treads His lonesome path, with unobserving eye Bent earthwards; he looks up--the clouds are split Asunder,--and above his head he sees

The clear Moon, and the glory of the heavens.

There, in a black-blue vault she sails along, Followed by multitudes of stars, that, small And sharp, and bright, along the dark abyss Drive as she drives: how fast they wheel away, Yet vanish not!--the wind is in the tree, But they are silent;--still they roll along Immeasurably distant; and the vault,

Built round by those white clouds, enormous clouds, Still deepens its unfathomable depth.

At length the Vision closes; and the mind, Not undisturbed by the delight it feels, Which slowly settles into peaceful calm, Is left to muse upon the solemn scene.

William Wordsworth





A Poet! He Hath Put his Heart to School

. A poet!--He hath put his heart to school, Nor dares to move unpropped upon the staff Which art hath lodged within his hand--must laugh By precept only, and shed tears by rule.

Thy Art be Nature; the live current quaff, And let the groveller sip his stagnant pool, In fear that else, when Critics grave and cool Have killed him, Scorn should write his epitaph.

How does the Meadow-flower its bloom unfold?

Because the lovely little flower is free Down to its root, and, in that freedom, bold; And so the grandeur of the Forest-tree Comes not by casting in a formal mould, But from its own divine vitality.

William Wordsworth





A Poet's Epitaph

Art thou a Statist in the van

Of public conflicts trained and bred?

--First learn to love one living man;

'Then' may'st thou think upon the dead.

A Lawyer art thou?--draw not nigh!

Go, carry to some fitter place

The keenness of that practised eye,

The hardness of that sallow face.

Art thou a Man of purple cheer?

A rosy Man, right plump to see?

Approach; yet, Doctor, not too near,

This grave no cushion is for thee.

Or art thou one of gallant pride,

A Soldier and no man of chaff?

Welcome!--but lay thy sword aside,

And lean upon a peasant's staff.

Physician art thou? one, all eyes,

Philosopher! a fingering slave,

One that would peep and botanise

Upon his mother's grave?

Wrapt closely in thy sensual fleece,

O turn aside,--and take, I pray,

That he below may rest in peace,

Thy ever-dwindling soul, away!

A Moralist perchance appears;

Led, Heaven knows how! to this poor sod: And he has neither eyes nor ears;

Himself his world, and his own God;

One to whose smooth-rubbed soul can cling Nor form, nor feeling, great or small; A reasoning, self-sufficing thing,

An intellectual All-in-all!

Shut close the door; press down the latch; Sleep in thy intellectual crust;

Nor lose ten tickings of thy watch

Near this unprofitable dust.

But who is He, with modest looks,

And clad in homely russet brown?

He murmurs near the running brooks

A music sweeter than their own.

He is retired as noontide dew,

Or fountain in a noon-day grove;





And you must love him, ere to you

He will seem worthy of your love.

The outward shows of sky and earth,

Of hill and valley, he has viewed;

And impulses of deeper birth

Have come to him in solitude.

In common things that round us lie

Some random truths he can impart,--

The harvest of a quiet eye

That broods and sleeps on his own heart.

But he is weak; both Man and Boy,

Hath been an idler in the land;

Contented if he might enjoy

The things which others understand.

--Come hither in thy hour of strength; Come, weak as is a breaking wave!

Here stretch thy body at full length; Or build thy house upon this grave.

William Wordsworth





A Slumber Did My Spirit Seal

A slumber did my spirit seal

I had no human fears:

She seemed a thing that could not feel The touch of earthly years.

No motion has she now, no force;

She neither hears nor sees;

Rolled round in earth's diurnal course, With rocks, and stones, and trees.

William Wordsworth





A Whirl-Blast from Behind the Hill

A Whirl-Blast from behind the hill

Rushed o'er the wood with startling sound; Then--all at once the air was still,

And showers of hailstones pattered round.

Where leafless oaks towered high above, I sat within an undergrove

Of tallest hollies, tall and green;

A fairer bower was never seen.

From year to year the spacious floor

With withered leaves is covered o'er, And all the year the bower is green.

But see! where'er the hailstones drop The withered leaves all skip and hop; There's not a breeze--no breath of air--

Yet here, and there, and everywhere

Along the floor, beneath the shade

By those embowering hollies made,

The leaves in myriads jump and spring, As if with pipes and music rare

Some Robin Good-fellow were there,

And all those leaves, in festive glee, Were dancing to the minstrelsy.

William Wordsworth





A Wren's Nest

AMONG the dwellings framed by birds

In field or forest with nice care,

Is none that with the little Wren's

In snugness may compare.

No door the tenement requires,

And seldom needs a laboured roof;

Yet is it to the fiercest sun

Impervious, and storm-proof.

So warm, so beautiful withal,

In perfect fitness for its aim,

That to the Kind by special grace

Their instinct surely came.

And when for their abodes they seek

An opportune recess,

The hermit has no finer eye

For shadowy quietness.

These find, 'mid ivied abbey-walls,

A canopy in some still nook;

Others are pent-housed by a brae

That overhangs a brook.

There to the brooding bird her mate

Warbles by fits his low clear song;

And by the busy streamlet both

Are sung to all day long.

Or in sequestered lanes they build,

Where, till the flitting bird's return, Her eggs within the nest repose,

Like relics in an urn.

But still, where general choice is good, There is a better and a best;

And, among fairest objects, some

Are fairer than the rest;

This, one of those small builders proved In a green covert, where, from out

The forehead of a pollard oak,

The leafy antlers sprout;

For She who planned the mossy lodge,

Mistrusting her evasive skill,

Had to a Primrose looked for aid

Her wishes to fulfill.

High on the trunk's projecting brow,

And fixed an infant's span above





The budding flowers, peeped forth the nest The prettiest of the grove!

The treasure proudly did I show

To some whose minds without disdain

Can turn to little things; but once

Looked up for it in vain:

'Tis gone---a ruthless spoiler's prey, Who heeds not beauty, love, or song,

'Tis gone! (so seemed it) and we grieved Indignant at the wrong.

Just three days after, passing by

In clearer light the moss-built cell

I saw, espied its shaded mouth;

And felt that all was well.

The Primrose for a veil had spread

The largest of her upright leaves;

And thus, for purposes benign,

A simple flower deceives.

Concealed from friends who might disturb Thy quiet with no ill intent,

Secure from evil eyes and hands

On barbarous plunder bent,

Rest, Mother-bird! and when thy young Take flight, and thou art free to roam, When withered is the guardian Flower, And empty thy late home,

Think how ye prospered, thou and thine, Amid the unviolated grove

Housed near the growing Primrose-tuft In foresight, or in love.

William Wordsworth





Address To The Scholars Of The Village School Of ----

I come, ye little noisy Crew,

Not long your pastime to prevent;

I heard the blessing which to you

Our common Friend and Father sent.

I kissed his cheek before he died;

And when his breath was fled,

I raised, while kneeling by his side, His hand:--it dropped like lead.

Your hands, dear Little-ones, do all

That can be done, will never fall

Like his till they are dead.

By night or day blow foul or fair,

Ne'er will the best of all your train Play with the locks of his white hair, Or stand between his knees again.

Here did he sit confined for hours;

But he could see the woods and plains, Could hear the wind and mark the showers Come streaming down the streaming panes.

Now stretched beneath his grass-green mound He rests a prisoner of the ground.

He loved the breathing air,

He loved the sun, but if it rise

Or set, to him where now he lies,

Brings not a moment's care.

Alas! what idle words; but take

The Dirge which for our Master's sake And yours, love prompted me to make.

The rhymes so homely in attire

With learned ears may ill agree,

But chanted by your Orphan Quire

Will make a touching melody.

DIRGE

Mourn, Shepherd, near thy old grey stone; Thou Angler, by the silent flood;

And mourn when thou art all alone,

Thou Woodman, in the distant wood!

Thou one blind Sailor, rich in joy

Though blind, thy tunes in sadness hum; And mourn, thou poor half-witted Boy!

Born deaf, and living deaf and dumb.

Thou drooping sick Man, bless the Guide Who checked or turned thy headstrong youth, As he before had sanctified

Thy infancy with heavenly truth.

Ye Striplings, light of heart and gay, Bold settlers on some foreign shore,





Give, when your thoughts are turned this way, A sigh to him whom we deplore.

For us who here in funeral strain

With one accord our voices raise,

Let sorrow overcharged with pain

Be lost in thankfulness and praise.

And when our hearts shall feel a sting From ill we meet or good we miss,

May touches of his memory bring

Fond healing, like a mother's kiss.

BY THE SIDE OF THE GRAVE SOME YEARS AFTER

LONG time his pulse hath ceased to beat But benefits, his gift, we trace--

Expressed in every eye we meet

Round this dear Vale, his native place.

To stately Hall and Cottage rude

Flowed from his life what still they hold, Light pleasures, every day, renewed;

And blessings half a century old.

Oh true of heart, of spirit gay,

Thy faults, where not already gone

From memory, prolong their stay

For charity's sweet sake alone.

Such solace find we for our loss;

And what beyond this thought we crave Comes in the promise from the Cross,

Shining upon thy happy grave.

William Wordsworth





After-Thought

. I thought of Thee, my partner and my guide, As being past away.--Vain sympathies!

For, backward, Duddon! as I cast my eyes, I see what was, and is, and will abide; Still glides the Stream, and shall for ever glide; The Form remains, the Function never dies; While we, the brave, the mighty, and the wise, We Men, who in our morn of youth defied The elements, must vanish;--be it so!

Enough, if something from our hands have power To live, and act, and serve the future hour; And if, as toward the silent tomb we go, Through love, through hope, and faith's transcendent dower, We feel that we are greater than we know.

William Wordsworth





An Evening Walk, Addressed to a Young Lady The young Lady to whom this was addressed was my Sister. It was composed at school, and during my two first College vacations.

There is not an image in it which I have not observed; and now, in my seventy-third year, I recollect the time and place where most of them were noticed. I will confine myself to one instance:

"Waving his hat, the shepherd, from the vale, Directs his winding dog the cliffs to scale,--

The dog, loud barking, 'mid the glittering rocks, Hunts, where his master points, the intercepted flocks."

I was an eye-witness of this for the first time while crossing the Pass of Dunmail Raise. Upon second thought, I will mention another image:

"And, fronting the bright west, yon oak entwines Its darkening boughs and leaves, in stronger lines."

This is feebly and imperfectly expressed, but I recollect distinctly the very spot where this first struck me. It was in the way between Hawkshead and Ambleside, and gave me extreme pleasure.

The moment was important in my poetical history; for I date from it my consciousness of the infinite variety of natural appearances which had been unnoticed by the poets of any age or country, so far as I was acquainted with them; and I made a resolution to supply, in some degree, the deficiency. I could not have been at that time above fourteen years of age. The description of the swans, that follows, was taken from the daily opportunities I had of observing their habits, not as confined to the gentleman's park, but in a state of nature. There were two pairs of them that divided the lake of Esthwaite and its in-and-out-flowing streams between them, never trespassing a single yard upon each other's separate domain. They were of the old magnificent species, bearing in beauty and majesty about the same relation to the Thames swan which that does to the goose. It was from the remembrance of those noble creatures I took, thirty years after, the picture of the swan which I have discarded from the poem of Dion. While I was a schoolboy, the late Mr. Curwen introduced a little fleet of those birds, but of the inferior species, to the lake of Windermere.

Their principal home was about his own island; but they sailed about into remote parts of the lake, and, either from real or imagined injury done to the adjoining fields, they were got rid of at the request of the farmers and proprietors, but to the great regret of all who had become attached to them, from noticing their beauty and quiet habits. I will conclude my notice of this poem by observing that the plan of it has not been confined to a particular walk or an individual place,--a proof (of which I was unconscious at the time) of my unwillingness to submit the poetic spirit to the chains of fact and real circumstance. The country is idealised rather than described in any one of its local aspects.

General Sketch of the Lakes--Author's regret of his youth which





was passed amongst them--Short description of Noon--Cascade--

Noontide Retreat--Precipice and sloping Lights--Face of Nature as the Sun declines--Mountain-farm, and the Cock--Slate-quarry--

Sunset--Superstition of the Country connected with that moment--

Swans--Female Beggar--Twilight-sounds--Western Lights--Spirits--

Night--Moonlight--Hope--Night-sounds--Conclusion.

FAR from my dearest Friend, 'tis mine to rove Through bare grey dell, high wood, and pastoral cove; Where Derwent rests, and listens to the roar That stuns the tremulous cliffs of high Lodore; Where peace to Grasmere's lonely island leads, To willowy hedge-rows, and to emerald meads; Leads to her bridge, rude church, and cottaged grounds, Her rocky sheepwalks, and her woodland bounds; Where, undisturbed by winds, Winander sleeps

'Mid clustering isles, and holly-sprinkled steeps; Where twilight glens endear my Esthwaite's shore, And memory of departed pleasures, more.

Fair scenes, erewhile, I taught, a happy child, The echoes of your rocks my carols wild: The spirit sought not then, in cherished sadness, A cloudy substitute for failing gladness, In youth's keen eye the livelong day was bright, The sun at morning, and the stars at night, Alike, when first the bittern's hollow bill Was heard, or woodcocks roamed the moonlight hill.

In thoughtless gaiety I coursed the plain, And hope itself was all I knew of pain; For then, the inexperienced heart would beat At times, while young Content forsook her seat, And wild Impatience, pointing upward, showed, Through passes yet unreached, a brighter road.

Alas! the idle tale of man is found

Depicted in the dial's moral round;

Hope with reflection blends her social rays To gild the total tablet of his days; Yet still, the sport of some malignant power, He knows but from its shade the present hour.

But why, ungrateful, dwell on idle pain?

To show what pleasures yet to me remain, Say, will my Friend, with unreluctant ear, The history of a poet's evening hear?

When, in the south, the wan noon, brooding still, Breathed a pale steam around the glaring hill, And shades of deep-embattled clouds were seen, Spotting the northern cliffs with lights between; When crowding cattle, checked by rails that make A fence far stretched into the shallow lake, Lashed the cool water with their restless tails, Or from high points of rock looked out for fanning gales: When school-boys stretched their length upon the green;





And round the broad-spread oak, a glimmering scene, In the rough fern-clad park, the herded deer Shook the still-twinkling tail and glancing ear; When horses in the sunburnt intake stood, And vainly eyed below the tempting flood, Or tracked the passenger, in mute distress, With forward neck the closing gate to press--

Then, while I wandered where the huddling rill Brightens with water-breaks the hollow ghyll As by enchantment, an obscure retreat Opened at once, and stayed my devious feet.

While thick above the rill the branches close, In rocky basin its wild waves repose, Inverted shrubs, and moss of gloomy green, Cling from the rocks, with pale wood-weeds between; And its own twilight softens the whole scene, Save where aloft the subtle sunbeams shine On withered briars that o'er the crags recline; Save where, with sparkling foam, a small cascade Illumines, from within, the leafy shade; Beyond, along the vista of the brook, Where antique roots its bustling course o'erlook, The eye reposes on a secret bridge

Half grey, half shagged with ivy to its ridge; There, bending o'er the stream, the listless swain Lingers behind his disappearing wain.

--Did Sabine grace adorn my living line, Blandusia's praise, wild stream, should yield to thine!

Never shall ruthless minister of death

'Mid thy soft glooms the glittering steel unsheath; No goblets shall, for thee, be crowned with flowers, No kid with piteous outcry thrill thy bowers; The mystic shapes that by thy margin rove A more benignant sacrifice approve--

A mind, that, in a calm angelic mood

Of happy wisdom, meditating good,

Beholds, of all from her high powers required, Much done, and much designed, and more desired,--

Harmonious thoughts, a soul by truth refined, Entire affection for all human kind.

Dear Brook, farewell! To-morrow's noon again Shall hide me, wooing long thy wildwood strain; But now the sun has gained his western road, And eve's mild hour invites my steps abroad.

While, near the midway cliff, the silvered kite In many a whistling circle wheels her flight; Slant watery lights, from parting clouds, apace Travel along the precipice's base;

Cheering its naked waste of scattered stone, By lichens grey, and scanty moss, o'ergrown; Where scarce the foxglove peeps, or thistle's beard; And restless stone-chat, all day long, is heard.





How pleasant, as the sun declines, to view The spacious landscape change in form and hue!


Of bright obscurity, hill, lawn, and wood; There, objects, by the searching beams betrayed, Come forth, and here retire in purple shade; Even the white stems of birch, the cottage white, Soften their glare before the mellow light; The skiffs, at anchor where with umbrage wide Yon chestnuts half the latticed boat-house hide, Shed from their sides, that face the sun's slant beam, Strong flakes of radiance on the tremulous stream: Raised by yon travelling flock, a dusty cloud Mounts from the road, and spreads its moving shroud; The shepherd, all involved in wreaths of fire, Now shows a shadowy speck, and now is lost entire.

Into a gradual calm the breezes sink, A blue rim borders all the lake's still brink; There doth the twinkling aspen's foliage sleep, And insects clothe, like dust, the glassy deep: And now, on every side, the surface breaks Into blue spots, and slowly lengthening streaks; Here, plots of sparkling water tremble bright With thousand thousand twinkling points of light; There, waves that, hardly weltering, die away, Tip their smooth ridges with a softer ray; And now the whole wide lake in deep repose Is hushed, and like a burnished mirror glows, Save where, along the shady western marge, Coasts, with industrious oar, the charcoal barge.

Their panniered train a group of potters goad, Winding from side to side up the steep road; The peasant, from yon cliff of fearful edge Shot, down the headlong path darts with his sledge; Bright beams the lonely mountain-horse illume Feeding 'mid purple heath, "green rings," and broom; While the sharp slope the slackened team confounds, Downward the ponderous timber-wain resounds; In foamy breaks the rill, with merry song, Dashed o'er the rough rock, lightly leaps along; From lonesome chapel at the mountain's feet, Three humble bells their rustic chime repeat; Sounds from the water-side the hammered boat; And 'blasted' quarry thunders, heard remote!

Even here, amid the sweep of endless woods, Blue pomp of lakes, high cliffs, and falling floods, Not undelightful are the simplest charms, Found by the grassy door of mountain-farms.

Sweetly ferocious, round his native walks, Pride of his sister-wives, the monarch stalks; Spur-clad his nervous feet, and firm his tread; A crest of purple tops the warrior's head.





Bright sparks his black and rolling eye-ball hurls Afar, his tail he closes and unfurls; On tiptoe reared, he strains his clarion throat, Threatened by faintly-answering farms remote: Again with his shrill voice the mountain rings, While, flapped with conscious pride, resound his wings.

Where, mixed with graceful birch, the sombrous pine And yew-tree o'er the silver rocks recline; I love to mark the quarry's moving trains, Dwarf panniered steeds, and men, and numerous wains; How busy all the enormous hive within, While Echo dallies with its various din!

Some (hear yon not their chisels' clinking sound?) Toil, small as pigmies in the gulf profound; Some, dim between the lofty cliffs descried, O'erwalk the slender plank from side to side; These, by the pale-blue rocks that ceaseless ring, In airy baskets hanging, work and sing.

Just where a cloud above the mountain rears An edge all flame, the broadening sun appears; A long blue bar its aegis orb divides, And breaks the spreading of its golden tides; And now that orb has touched the purple steep Whose softened image penetrates the deep.

'Cross the calm lake's blue shades the cliffs aspire, With towers and woods, a "prospect all on fire;"

While coves and secret hollows, through a ray Of fainter gold, a purple gleam betray.

Each slip of lawn the broken rocks between Shines in the light with more than earthly green: Deep yellow beams the scattered stems illume, Far in the level forest's central gloom: Waving his hat, the shepherd, from the vale, Directs his winding dog the cliffs to scale,--

The dog, loud barking, 'mid the glittering rocks, Hunts, where his master points, the intercepted flocks.

Where oaks o'erhang the road the radiance shoots On tawny earth, wild weeds, and twisted roots; The druid-stones a brightened ring unfold; And all the babbling brooks are liquid gold; Sunk to a curve, the day-star lessens still, Gives one bright glance, and drops behind the hill.

In these secluded vales, if village fame, Confirmed by hoary hairs, belief may claim; When up the hills, as now, retired the light, Strange apparitions mocked the shepherd's sight.

The form appears of one that spurs his steed Midway along the hill with desperate speed; Unhurt pursues his lengthened flight, while all Attend, at every stretch, his headlong fall.


Of horsemen-shadows moving to and fro;





At intervals imperial banners stream, And now the van reflects the solar beam; The rear through iron brown betrays a sullen gleam.

While silent stands the admiring crowd below, Silent the visionary warriors go,

Winding in ordered pomp their upward way Till the last banner of the long array Has disappeared, and every trace is fled Of splendour--save the beacon's spiry head Tipt with eve's latest gleam of burning red.

Now, while the solemn evening shadows sail, On slowly-waving pinions, down the vale; And, fronting the bright west, yon oak entwines Its darkening boughs and leaves, in stronger lines;

'Tis pleasant near the tranquil lake to stray Where, winding on along some secret bay, The swan uplifts his chest, and backward flings His neck, a varying arch, between his towering wings: The eye that marks the gliding creature sees How graceful, pride can be, and how majestic, ease, While tender cares and mild domestic loves With furtive watch pursue her as she moves, The female with a meeker charm succeeds, And her brown little-ones around her leads, Nibbling the water lilies as they pass, Or playing wanton with the floating grass.

She, in a mother's care, her beauty's pride Forgetting, calls the wearied to her side; Alternately they mount her back, and rest Close by her mantling wings' embraces prest.

Long may they float upon this flood serene; Theirs be these holms untrodden, still, and green, Where leafy shades fence off the blustering gale, And breathes in peace the lily of the vale!

Yon isle, which feels not even the milkmaid's feet, Yet hears her song, "by distance made more sweet,"

Yon isle conceals their home, their hut-like bower; Green water-rushes overspread the floor; Long grass and willows form the woven wall, And swings above the roof the poplar tall.

Thence issuing often with unwieldy stalk, They crush with broad black feet their flowery walk; Or, from the neighbouring water, hear at morn The hound, the horse's tread, and mellow horn; Involve their serpent-necks in changeful rings, Rolled wantonly between their slippery wings, Or, starting up with noise and rude delight, Force half upon the wave their cumbrous flight.

Fair Swan! by all a mother's joys caressed, Haply some wretch has eyed, and called thee blessed; When with her infants, from some shady seat By the lake's edge, she rose--to face the noontide heat;





Or taught their limbs along the dusty road A few short steps to totter with their load.

I see her now, denied to lay her head, On cold blue nights, in hut or straw-built shed, Turn to a silent smile their sleepy cry, By pointing to the gliding moon on high.

--When low-hung clouds each star of summer hide, And fireless are the valleys far and wide, Where the brook brawls along the public road Dark with bat-haunted ashes stretching broad, Oft has she taught them on her lap to lay The shining glow-worm; or, in heedless play, Toss it from hand to hand, disquieted; While others, not unseen, are free to shed Green unmolested light upon their mossy bed.

Oh! when the sleety showers her path assail, And like a torrent roars the headstrong gale; No more her breath can thaw their fingers cold, Their frozen arms her neck no more can fold; Weak roof a cowering form two babes to shield, And faint the fire a dying heart can yield!

Press the sad kiss, fond mother! vainly fears Thy flooded cheek to wet them with its tears; No tears can chill them, and no bosom warms, Thy breast their death-bed, coffined in thine arms!

Sweet are the sounds that mingle from afar, Heard by calm lakes, as peeps the folding star, Where the duck dabbles 'mid the rustling sedge, And feeding pike starts from the water's edge, Or the swan stirs the reeds, his neck and bill Wetting, that drip upon the water still; And heron, as resounds the trodden shore, Shoots upward, darting his long neck before.

Now, with religious awe, the farewell light Blends with the solemn colouring of night;

'Mid groves of clouds that crest the mountain's brow, And round the west's proud lodge their shadows throw, Like Una shining on her gloomy way,

The half-seen form of Twilight roams astray; Shedding, through paly loop-holes mild and small, Gleams that upon the lake's still bosom fall; Soft o'er the surface creep those lustres pale Tracking the motions of the fitful gale.

With restless interchange at once the bright Wins on the shade, the shade upon the light.


When gentle Spirits urged a sportive chase, Brushing with lucid wands the water's face: While music, stealing round the glimmering deeps, Charmed the tall circle of the enchanted steeps.

--The lights are vanished from the watery plains:





No wreck of all the pageantry remains.

Unheeded night has overcome the vales: On the dark earth the wearied vision fails; The latest lingerer of the forest train, The lone black fir, forsakes the faded plain; Last evening sight, the cottage smoke, no more, Lost in the thickened darkness, glimmers hoar; And, towering from the sullen dark-brown mere, Like a black wall, the mountain-steeps appear.

--Now o'er the soothed accordant heart we feel A sympathetic twilight slowly steal,

And ever, as we fondly muse, we find

The soft gloom deepening on the tranquil mind.

Stay! pensive, sadly-pleasing visions, stay!

Ah no! as fades the vale, they fade away: Yet still the tender, vacant gloom remains; Still the cold cheek its shuddering tear retains.

The bird, who ceased, with fading light, to thread Silent the hedge or steamy rivulet's bed, From his grey re-appearing tower shall soon Salute with gladsome note the rising moon, While with a hoary light she frosts the ground, And pours a deeper blue to Aether's bound; Pleased, as she moves, her pomp of clouds to fold In robes of azure, fleecy-white, and gold.

Above yon eastern hill, where darkness broods O'er all its vanished dells, and lawns, and woods; Where but a mass of shade the sight can trace, Even now she shews, half-veiled, her lovely face: Across the gloomy valley flings her light, Far to the western slopes with hamlets white; And gives, where woods the chequered upland strew, To the green corn of summer, autumn's hue.

Thus Hope, first pouring from her blessed horn Her dawn, far lovelier than the moon's own morn, Till higher mounted, strives in vain to cheer The weary hills, impervious, blackening near; Yet does she still, undaunted, throw the while On darling spots remote her tempting smile.

Even now she decks for me a distant scene, (For dark and broad the gulf of time between) Gilding that cottage with her fondest ray, (Sole bourn, sole wish, sole object of my way; How fair its lawns and sheltering woods appear!

How sweet its streamlet murmurs in mine ear!) Where we, my Friend, to happy days shall rise, Till our small share of hardly-paining sighs (For sighs will ever trouble human breath) Creep hushed into the tranquil breast of death.

But now the clear bright Moon her zenith gains, And, rimy without speck, extend the plains: The deepest cleft the mountain's front displays





Scarce hides a shadow from her searching rays; From the dark-blue faint silvery threads divide The hills, while gleams below the azure tide; Time softly treads; throughout the landscape breathes A peace enlivened, not disturbed, by wreaths Of charcoal-smoke, that o'er the fallen wood, Steal down the hill, and spread along the flood.

The song of mountain-streams, unheard by day, Now hardly heard, beguiles my homeward way.

Air listens, like the sleeping water, still, To catch the spiritual music of the hill, Broke only by the slow clock tolling deep, Or shout that wakes the ferry-man from sleep, The echoed hoof nearing the distant shore, The boat's first motion--made with dashing oar; Sound of closed gate, across the water borne, Hurrying the timid hare through rustling corn; The sportive outcry of the mocking owl; And at long intervals the mill-dog's howl; The distant forge's swinging thump profound; Or yell, in the deep woods, of lonely hound.

William Wordsworth





Andrew Jones

I hate that Andrew Jones; he'll breed His children up to waste and pillage.

I wish the press-gang or the drum

With its tantara sound would come,

And sweep him from the village!

I said not this, because he loves

Through the long day to swear and tipple; But for the poor dear sake of one

To whom a foul deed he had done,

A friendless man, a travelling cripple!

For this poor crawling helpless wretch, Some horseman who was passing by,

A penny on the ground had thrown;

But the poor cripple was alone

And could not stoop--no help was nigh.

Inch-thick the dust lay on the ground For it had long been droughty weather; So with his staff the cripple wrought Among the dust till he had brought

The half-pennies together.

It chanced that Andrew passed that way Just at the time; and there he found

The cripple in the mid-day heat

Standing alone, and at his feet

He saw the penny on the ground.

He stopped and took the penny up:

And when the cripple nearer drew,

Quoth Andrew, "Under half-a-crown, What a man finds is all his own,

And so, my Friend, good-day to you."

And 'hence' I said, that Andrew's boys Will all be trained to waste and pillage; And wished the press-gang, or the drum With its tantara sound, would come

And sweep him from the village.

William Wordsworth





Anecdote For Fathers

I HAVE a boy of five years old;

His face is fair and fresh to see;

His limbs are cast in beautyÕs mold

And dearly he loves me.

One morn we strolled on our dry walk, Or quiet home all full in view,

And held such intermitted talk

As we are wont to do.

My thoughts on former pleasures ran;

I thought of Kilve's delightful shore, Our pleasant home when spring began,

A long, long year before.

A day it was when I could bear

Some fond regrets to entertain;

With so much happiness to spare,

I could not feel a pain.

The green earth echoed to the feet

Of lambs that bounded through the glade, From shade to sunshine, and as fleet

From sunshine back to shade.

Birds warbled round me---and each trace Of inward sadness had its charm;

Kilve, thought I, was a favoured place, And so is Liswyn farm.

My boy beside me tripped, so slim

And graceful in his rustic dress!

And, as we talked, I questioned him,

In very idleness.

'Now tell me, had you rather be,'

I said. and took him by the arm,

'On Kilve's smooth shore, by the green sea, Or here at Liswyn farm?'

In careless mood he looked at me,

While still I held him by the arm,

And said, 'At Kilve I'd rather be

Than here at Liswyn farm.'

'Now, little Edward, say why so:

My little Edward, tell me why.'---

'I cannot tell, I do not know.'---

'Why, this is strange,' said I;

'For, here are woods, hills smooth and warm: There surely must one reason be





Why you would change sweet Liswyn farm For Kilve by the green sea.'

At this, my boy hung down his head,

He blushed with shame, nor made reply; And three times to the child I said,

'Why, :Edward, tell me why?'

His head he raised---there was in sight, It caught his eye, he saw it plain---

Upon the house-top, glittering bright, A broad and gilded vane.

Then did the boy his tongue unlock,

And eased his mind with this reply:

'At Kilve there was no weather-cock;

And that's the reaon why.'

O dearest, dearest boy! my heart

For better lore would seldom yearn,

Could I but teach the hundredth part

Of what from thee I learn.

William Wordsworth





Animal Tranquility and Decay

The little hedgerow birds,

That peck along the roads, regard him not.

He travels on, and in his face, his step, His gait, is one expression: every limb, His look and bending figure, all bespeak A man who does not move with pain, but moves With thought.--He is insensibly subdued To settled quiet: he is one by whom

All effort seems forgotten; one to whom Long patience hath such mild composure given, That patience now doth seem a thing of which He hath no need. He is by nature led

To peace so perfect that the young behold With envy, what the Old Man hardly feels.

William Wordsworth





Animal Tranquillity and Decay

The little hedgerow birds,

That peck along the roads, regard him not.

He travels on, and in his face, his step, His gait, is one expression: every limb, His look and bending figure, all bespeak A man who does not move with pain, but moves With thought.--He is insensibly subdued To settled quiet: he is one by whom

All effort seems forgotten; one to whom Long patience hath such mild composure given, That patience now doth seem a thing of which He hath no need. He is by nature led

To peace so perfect that the young behold With envy, what the Old Man hardly feels.

William Wordsworth





Birth of Love, The

When Love was born of heavenly line,

What dire intrigues disturbed Cythera's joy!

Till Venus cried, "A mother's heart is mine; None but myself shall nurse my boy,"

But, infant as he was, the child

In that divine embrace enchanted lay; And, by the beauty of the vase beguiled, Forgot the beverage--and pined away.

"And must my offspring languish in my sight?"

(Alive to all a mother's pain,

The Queen of Beauty thus her court addressed)

"No: Let the most discreet of all my train Receive him to her breast:

Think all, he is the God of young delight."

Then TENDERNESS with CANDOUR joined,

And GAIETY the charming office sought; Nor even DELICACY stayed behind:

But none of those fair Graces brought Wherewith to nurse the child--and still he pined.

Some fond hearts to COMPLIANCE seemed inclined; But she had surely spoiled the boy:

And sad experience forbade a thought

On the wild Goddess of VOLUPTUOUS JOY.

Long undecided lay th' important choice, Till of the beauteous court, at length, a voice Pronounced the name of HOPE:--The conscious child Stretched forth his little arms, and smiled.

'Tis said ENJOYMENT (who averred

The charge belonged to her alone)

Jealous that HOPE had been preferred

Laid snares to make the babe her own.

Of INNOCENCE the garb she took,

The blushing mien and downcast look;

And came her services to proffer:

And HOPE (what has not Hope believed!) By that seducing air deceived,

Accepted of the offer.

It happened that, to sleep inclined,

Deluded HOPE: for one short hour

To that false INNOCENCE'S power

Her little charge consigned.

The Goddess then her lap with sweetmeats filled And gave, in handfuls gave, the treacherous store:





A wild delirium first the infant thrilled; But soon upon her breast he sunk--to wake no more.

William Wordsworth





Brothers, The

"These Tourists, heaven preserve us! needs must live A profitable life: some glance along, Rapid and gay, as if the earth were air, And they were butterflies to wheel about Long as the summer lasted: some, as wise, Perched on the forehead of a jutting crag, Pencil in hand and book upon the knee, Will look and scribble, scribble on and look, Until a man might travel twelve stout miles, Or reap an acre of his neighbour's corn.

But, for that moping Son of Idleness, Why can he tarry 'yonder'?--In our churchyard Is neither epitaph nor monument,

Tombstone nor name--only the turf we tread And a few natural graves."

To Jane, his wife,

Thus spake the homely Priest of Ennerdale.

It was a July evening; and he sate

Upon the long stone-seat beneath the eaves Of his old cottage,--as it chanced, that day, Employed in winter's work. Upon the stone His wife sate near him, teasing matted wool, While, from the twin cards toothed with glittering wire, He fed the spindle of his youngest child, Who, in the open air, with due accord Of busy hands and back-and-forward steps, Her large round wheel was turning. Towards the field In which the Parish Chapel stood alone, Girt round with a bare ring of mossy wall, While half an hour went by, the Priest had sent Many a long look of wonder: and at last, Risen from his seat, beside the snow-white ridge Of carded wool which the old man had piled He laid his implements with gentle care, Each in the other locked; and, down the path That from his cottage to the church-yard led, He took his way, impatient to accost

The Stranger, whom he saw still lingering there.

'Twas one well known to him in former days, A Shepherd-lad; who ere his sixteenth year Had left that calling, tempted to entrust His expectations to the fickle winds

And perilous waters; with the mariners A fellow-mariner;--and so had fared

Through twenty seasons; but he had been reared Among the mountains, and he in his heart Was half a shepherd on the stormy seas.

Oft in the piping shrouds had Leonard heard The tones of waterfalls, and inland sounds Of caves and trees:--and, when the regular wind Between the tropics filled the steady sail, And blew with the same breath through days and weeks,





Lengthening invisibly its weary line

Along the cloudless Main, he, in those hours Of tiresome indolence, would often hang Over the vessel's side, and gaze and gaze; And, while the broad blue wave and sparkling foam Flashed round him images and hues that wrought In union with the employment of his heart, He, thus by feverish passion overcome, Even with the organs of his bodily eye, Below him, in the bosom of the deep,

Saw mountains; saw the forms of sheep that grazed On verdant hills--with dwellings among trees, And shepherds clad in the same country grey Which he himself had worn.

And now, at last,

From perils manifold, with some small wealth Acquired by traffic 'mid the Indian Isles, To his paternal home he is returned,

With a determined purpose to resume

The life he had lived there; both for the sake Of many darling pleasures, and the love Which to an only brother he has borne In all his hardships, since that happy time When, whether it blew foul or fair, they two Were brother-shepherds on their native hills.

--They were the last of all their race: and now, When Leonard had approached his home, his heart Failed in him; and, not venturing to enquire Tidings of one so long and dearly loved, He to the solitary churchyard turned; That, as he knew in what particular spot His family were laid, he thence might learn If still his Brother lived, or to the file Another grave was added.--He had found Another grave,--near which a full half-hour He had remained; but, as he gazed, there grew Such a confusion in his memory,

That he began to doubt; and even to hope That he had seen this heap of turf before,--


By this the Priest, who down the field had come, Unseen by Leonard, at the churchyard gate Stopped short,--and thence, at leisure, limb by limb





Perused him with a gay complacency.

Ay, thought the Vicar, smiling to himself,

'Tis one of those who needs must leave the path Of the world's business to go wild alone: His arms have a perpetual holiday;

The happy man will creep about the fields, Following his fancies by the hour, to bring Tears down his cheek, or solitary smiles Into his face, until the setting sun

Write fool upon his forehead.--Planted thus Beneath a shed that over-arched the gate Of this rude churchyard, till the stars appeared The good Man might have communed with himself, But that the Stranger, who had left the grave, Approached; he recognised the Priest at once, And, after greetings interchanged, and given By Leonard to the Vicar as to one

Unknown to him, this dialogue ensued.

LEONARD. You live, Sir, in these dales, a quiet life: Your years make up one peaceful family; And who would grieve and fret, if, welcome come And welcome gone, they are so like each other, They cannot be remembered? Scarce a funeral Comes to this churchyard once in eighteen months; And yet, some changes must take place among you: And you, who dwell here, even among these rocks, Can trace the finger of mortality,

And see, that with our threescore years and ten We are not all that perish.----I remember, (For many years ago I passed this road) There was a foot-way all along the fields By the brook-side--'tis gone--and that dark cleft!

To me it does not seem to wear the face Which then it had!

PRIEST. Nay, Sir, for aught I know,

That chasm is much the same--

LEONARD. But, surely, yonder--

PRIEST. Ay, there, indeed, your memory is a friend That does not play you false.--On that tall pike (It is the loneliest place of all these hills) There were two springs which bubbled side by side, As if they had been made that they might be Companions for each other: the huge crag Was rent with lightning--one hath disappeared; The other, left behind, is flowing still.

For accidents and changes such as these, We want not store of them;--a waterspout Will bring down half a mountain; what a feast For folks that wander up and down like you, To see an acre's breadth of that wide cliff One roaring cataract! a sharp May-storm Will come with loads of January snow,





And in one night send twenty score of sheep To feed the ravens; or a shepherd dies By some untoward death among the rocks: The ice breaks up and sweeps away a bridge; A wood is felled:--and then for our own homes!

A child is born or christened, a field ploughed, A daughter sent to service, a web spun, The old house-clock is decked with a new face; And hence, so far from wanting facts or dates To chronicle the time, we all have here A pair of diaries,--one serving, Sir, For the whole dale, and one for each fireside--

Yours was a stranger's judgment: for historians, Commend me to these valleys!

LEONARD. Yet your Churchyard

Seems, if such freedom may be used with you, To say that you are heedless of the past: An orphan could not find his mother's grave: Here's neither head nor foot stone, plate of brass, Cross-bones nor skull,--type of our earthly state Nor emblem of our hopes: the dead man's home Is but a fellow to that pasture-field.

PRIEST. Why, there, Sir, is a thought that's new to me!

The stone-cutters, 'tis true, might beg their bread If every English churchyard were like ours; Yet your conclusion wanders from the truth: We have no need of names and epitaphs; We talk about the dead by our firesides.

And then, for our immortal part! 'we' want No symbols, Sir, to tell us that plain tale: The thought of death sits easy on the man Who has been born and dies among the mountains.

LEONARD. Your Dalesmen, then, do in each other's thoughts Possess a kind of second life: no doubt You, Sir, could help me to the history Of half these graves?

PRIEST. For eight-score winters past, With what I've witnessed, and with what I've heard, Perhaps I might; and, on a winter-evening, If you were seated at my chimney's nook, By turning o'er these hillocks one by one, We two could travel, Sir, through a strange round; Yet all in the broad highway of the world.

Now there's a grave--your foot is half upon it,--


Died broken-hearted.

LEONARD. 'Tis a common case.

We'll take another: who is he that lies Beneath yon ridge, the last of those three graves?

It touches on that piece of native rock Left in the church-yard wall.

PRIEST. That's Walter Ewbank.





He had as white a head and fresh a cheek As ever were produced by youth and age Engendering in the blood of hale fourscore.

Through five long generations had the heart Of Walter's forefathers o'erflowed the bounds Of their inheritance, that single cottage--

You see it yonder! and those few green fields.

They toiled and wrought, and still, from sire to son, Each struggled, and each yielded as before A little--yet a little,--and old Walter, They left to him the family heart, and land With other burthens than the crop it bore.

Year after year the old man still kept up A cheerful mind,--and buffeted with bond, Interest, and mortgages; at last he sank, And went into his grave before his time.

Poor Walter! whether it was care that spurred him God only knows, but to the very last

He had the lightest foot in Ennerdale: His pace was never that of an old man: I almost see him tripping down the path With his two grandsons after him:--but you, Unless our Landlord be your host tonight, Have far to travel,--and on these rough paths Even in the longest day of midsummer--

LEONARD. But those two Orphans!

PRIEST. Orphans!--Such they were--

Yet not while Walter lived: for, though their parents Lay buried side by side as now they lie, The old man was a father to the boys, Two fathers in one father: and if tears, Shed when he talked of them where they were not, And hauntings from the infirmity of love, Are aught of what makes up a mother's heart, This old Man, in the day of his old age, Was half a mother to them.--If you weep, Sir, To hear a stranger talking about strangers, Heaven bless you when you are among your kindred!

Ay--you may turn that way--it is a grave Which will bear looking at.

LEONARD. These boys--I hope

They loved this good old Man?--

PRIEST. They did--and truly:

But that was what we almost overlooked, They were such darlings of each other. Yes, Though from the cradle they had lived with Walter, The only kinsman near them, and though he Inclined to both by reason of his age, With a more fond, familiar, tenderness; They, notwithstanding, had much love to spare, And it all went into each other's hearts.

Leonard, the elder by just eighteen months,





Was two years taller: 'twas a joy to see, To hear, to meet them!--From their house the school Is distant three short miles, and in the time Of storm and thaw, when every watercourse And unbridged stream, such as you may have noticed Crossing our roads at every hundred steps, Was swoln into a noisy rivulet,

Would Leonard then, when eider boys remained At home, go staggering through the slippery fords, Bearing his brother on his back. I have seen him, On windy days, in one of those stray brooks, Ay, more than once I have seen him, midleg deep, Their two books lying both on a dry stone, Upon the hither side: and once I said, As I remember, looking round these rocks And hills on which we all of us were born, That God who made the great book of the world Would bless such piety--

LEONARD. It may be then--

PRIEST. Never did worthier lads break English bread: The very brightest Sunday Autumn saw

With all its mealy clusters of ripe nuts, Could never keep those boys away from church, Or tempt them to an hour of sabbath breach.

Leonard and James! I warrant, every corner Among these rocks, and every hollow place That venturous foot could reach, to one or both Was known as well as to the flowers that grow there.

Like roe-bucks they went bounding o'er the hills; They played like two young ravens on the crags: Then they could write, ay and speak too, as well As many of their betters--and for Leonard!

The very night before he went away,

In my own house I put into his hand

A Bible, and I'd wager house and field That, if he be alive, he has it yet.

LEONARD. It seems, these Brothers have not lived to be A comfort to each other--

PRIEST. That they might


And what, for my part, I have often prayed: But Leonard--

LEONARD. Then James still is left among you!

PRIEST. 'Tis of the elder brother I am speaking: They had an uncle;--he was at that time A thriving man, and trafficked on the seas: And, but for that same uncle, to this hour Leonard had never handled rope or shroud: For the boy loved the life which we lead here; And though of unripe years, a stripling only, His soul was knit to this his native soil.





But, as I said, old Walter was too weak To strive with such a torrent; when he died, The estate and house were sold; and all their sheep, A pretty flock, and which, for aught I know, Had clothed the Ewbanks for a thousand years:--

Well--all was gone, and they were destitute, And Leonard, chiefly for his Brother's sake, Resolved to try his fortune on the seas.

Twelve years are past since we had tidings from him.

If there were one among us who had heard That Leonard Ewbank was come home again, From the Great Gavel, down by Leeza's banks, And down the Enna, far as Egremont,

The day would be a joyous festival;

And those two bells of ours, which there you see--

Hanging in the open air--but, O good Sir!

This is sad talk--they'll never sound for him--

Living or dead.--When last we heard of him, He was in slavery among the Moors

Upon the Barbary coast.--'Twas not a little That would bring down his spirit; and no doubt, Before it ended in his death, the Youth Was sadly crossed.--Poor Leonard! when we parted, He took me by the hand, and said to me, If e'er he should grow rich, he would return, To live in peace upon his father's land, And any his bones among us.

LEONARD. If that day

Should come, 'twould needs be a glad day for him; He would himself, no doubt, be happy then As any that should meet him--

PRIEST. Happy! Sir--

LEONARD. You said his kindred all were in their graves, And that he had one Brother--

PRIEST. That is but

A fellow-tale of sorrow. From his youth James, though not sickly, yet was delicate; And Leonard being always by his side

Had done so many offices about him,

That, though he was not of a timid nature, Yet still the spirit of a mountain-boy In him was somewhat checked; and, when his Brother Was gone to sea, and he was left alone, The little colour that he had was soon Stolen from his cheek; he drooped, and pined, and pined--

LEONARD. But these are all the graves of full-grown men!

PRIEST. Ay, Sir, that passed away: we took him to us; He was the child of all the dale--he lived Three months with one, and six months with another, And wanted neither food, nor clothes, nor love: And many, many happy days were his.

But, whether blithe or sad, 'tis my belief





His absent Brother still was at his heart.

And, when he dwelt beneath our roof, we found (A practice till this time unknown to him) That often, rising from his bed at night, He in his sleep would walk about, and sleeping He sought his brother Leonard.--You are moved!

Forgive me, Sir: before I spoke to you, I judged you most unkindly.

LEONARD. But this Youth,

How did he die at last?

PRIEST. One sweet May-morning,

(It will be twelve years since when Spring returns) He had gone forth among the new-dropped lambs, With two or three companions, whom their course Of occupation led from height to height Under a cloudless sun--till he, at length, Through weariness, or, haply, to indulge The humour of the moment, lagged behind.

You see yon precipice;--it wears the shape Of a vast building made of many crags; And in the midst is one particular rock That rises like a column from the vale, Whence by our shepherds it is called, THE PILLAR.

Upon its aery summit crowned with heath, The loiterer, not unnoticed by his comrades, Lay stretched at ease; but, passing by the place On their return, they found that he was gone.


LEONARD. And that then 'is' his grave!--Before his death You say that he saw many happy years?

PRIEST. Ay, that he did--

LEONARD. And all went well with him?--

PRIEST. If he had one, the Youth had twenty homes.

LEONARD. And you believe, then, that his mind was easy?--

PRIEST. Yes, long before he died, he found that time Is a true friend to sorrow; and unless His thoughts were turned on Leonard's luckless fortune, He talked about him with a cheerful love.

LEONARD. He could not come to an unhallowed end!

PRIEST. Nay, God forbid!--You recollect I mentioned A habit which disquietude and grief

Had brought upon him; and we all conjectured That, as the day was warm, he had lain down





On the soft heath,--and, waiting for his comrades, He there had fallen asleep; that in his sleep He to the margin of the precipice

Had walked, and from the summit had fallen headlong: And so no doubt he perished. When the Youth Fell, in his hand he must have grasped, we think, His shepherd's staff; for on that Pillar of rock It had been caught mid-way; and there for years It hung;--and mouldered there.

The Priest here ended--

The Stranger would have thanked him, but he felt A gushing from his heart, that took away The power of speech. Both left the spot in silence; And Leonard, when they reached the churchyard gate, As the Priest lifted up the latch, turned round,--

And, looking at the grave, he said, "My Brother!"

The Vicar did not hear the words: and now, He pointed towards his dwelling-place, entreating That Leonard would partake his homely fare: The other thanked him with an earnest voice; But added, that, the evening being calm, He would pursue his journey. So they parted.

It was not long ere Leonard reached a grove That overhung the road: he there stopped short, And, sitting down beneath the trees, reviewed All that the Priest had said: his early years Were with him:--his long absence, cherished hopes, And thoughts which had been his an hour before, All pressed on him with such a weight, that now, This vale, where he had been so happy, seemed A place in which he could not bear to live: So he relinquished all his purposes.

He travelled back to Egremont: and thence, That night, he wrote a letter to the Priest, Reminding him of what had passed between them; And adding, with a hope to be forgiven, That it was from the weakness of his heart He had not dared to tell him who he was.

This done, he went on shipboard, and is now A Seaman, a grey-headed Mariner.

William Wordsworth





By the Seaside

The sun is couched, the sea-fowl gone to rest, And the wild storm hath somewhere found a nest; Air slumbers--wave with wave no longer strives, Only a heaving of the deep survives,

A tell-tale motion! soon will it be laid, And by the tide alone the water swayed.

Stealthy withdrawings, interminglings mild Of light with shade in beauty reconciled--

Such is the prospect far as sight can range, The soothing recompence, the welcome change.

Where, now, the ships that drove before the blast, Threatened by angry breakers as they passed; And by a train of flying clouds bemocked; Or, in the hollow surge, at anchor rocked As on a bed of death? Some lodge in peace, Saved by His care who bade the tempest cease; And some, too heedless of past danger, court Fresh gales to waft them to the far-off port But near, or hanging sea and sky between, Not one of all those winged powers is seen, Seen in her course, nor 'mid this quiet heard; Yet oh! how gladly would the air be stirred By some acknowledgment of thanks and praise, Soft in its temper as those vesper lays Sung to the Virgin while accordant oars Urge the slow bark along Calabrian shores; A sea-born service through the mountains felt Till into one loved vision all things melt: Or like those hymns that soothe with graver sound The gulfy coast of Norway iron-bound; And, from the wide and open Baltic, rise With punctual care, Lutherian harmonies.

Hush, not a voice is here! but why repine, Now when the star of eve comes forth to shine On British waters with that look benign?

Ye mariners, that plough your onward way, Or in the haven rest, or sheltering bay, May silent thanks at least to God be given With a full heart; "our thoughts are 'heard' in heaven."

William Wordsworth





Calm is all Nature as a Resting Wheel.

Calm is all nature as a resting wheel.

The kine are couched upon the dewy grass; The horse alone, seen dimly as I pass, Is cropping audibly his later meal:

Dark is the ground; a slumber seems to steal O'er vale, and mountain, and the starless sky.

Now, in this blank of things, a harmony, Home-felt, and home-created, comes to heal That grief for which the senses still supply Fresh food; for only then, when memory Is hushed, am I at rest. My Friends! restrain Those busy cares that would allay my pain; Oh! leave me to myself, nor let me feel The officious touch that makes me droop again.

William Wordsworth





Character of the Happy Warrior

. Who is the happy Warrior? Who is he That every man in arms should wish to be?

--It is the generous Spirit, who, when brought Among the tasks of real life, hath wrought Upon the plan that pleased his boyish thought: Whose high endeavours are an inward light That makes the path before him always bright; Who, with a natural instinct to discern What knowledge can perform, is diligent to learn; Abides by this resolve, and stops not there, But makes his moral being his prime care; Who, doomed to go in company with Pain, And Fear, and Bloodshed, miserable train!

Turns his necessity to glorious gain; In face of these doth exercise a power Which is our human nature's highest dower: Controls them and subdues, transmutes, bereaves Of their bad influence, and their good receives: By objects, which might force the soul to abate Her feeling, rendered more compassionate; Is placable--because occasions rise

So often that demand such sacrifice;

More skilful in self-knowledge, even more pure, As tempted more; more able to endure, As more exposed to suffering and distress; Thence, also, more alive to tenderness.

--'Tis he whose law is reason; who depends Upon that law as on the best of friends; Whence, in a state where men are tempted still To evil for a guard against worse ill, And what in quality or act is best

Doth seldom on a right foundation rest, He labours good on good to fix, and owes To virtue every triumph that he knows:

--Who, if he rise to station of command, Rises by open means; and there will stand On honourable terms, or else retire,

And in himself possess his own desire; Who comprehends his trust, and to the same Keeps faithful with a singleness of aim; And therefore does not stoop, nor lie in wait For wealth, or honours, or for worldly state; Whom they must follow; on whose head must fall, Like showers of manna, if they come at all: Whose powers shed round him in the common strife, Or mild concerns of ordinary life,

A constant influence, a peculiar grace; But who, if he be called upon to face Some awful moment to which Heaven has joined Great issues, good or bad for human kind, Is happy as a Lover; and attired

With sudden brightness, like a Man inspired;





And, through the heat of conflict, keeps the law In calmness made, and sees what he foresaw; Or if an unexpected call succeed,

Come when it will, is equal to the need:

--He who, though thus endued as with a sense And faculty for storm and turbulence, Is yet a Soul whose master-bias leans To homefelt pleasures and to gentle scenes; Sweet images! which, wheresoe'er he be, Are at his heart; and such fidelity

It is his darling passion to approve; More brave for this, that he hath much to love:--

'Tis, finally, the Man, who, lifted high, Conspicuous object in a Nation's eye, Or left unthought-of in obscurity,--

Who, with a toward or untoward lot,

Prosperous or adverse, to his wish or not--

Plays, in the many games of life, that one Where what he most doth value must be won: Whom neither shape or danger can dismay, Nor thought of tender happiness betray; Who, not content that former worth stand fast, Looks forward, persevering to the last, From well to better, daily self-surpast: Who, whether praise of him must walk the earth For ever, and to noble deeds give birth, Or he must fall, to sleep without his fame, And leave a dead unprofitable name--

Finds comfort in himself and in his cause; And, while the mortal mist is gathering, draws His breath in confidence of Heaven's applause: This is the happy Warrior; this is he That every man in arms should wish to be.

William Wordsworth





Childless Father, The

"Up, Timothy, up with your staff and away!

Not a soul in the village this morning will stay; The hare has just started from Hamilton's grounds, And Skiddaw is glad with the cry of the hounds."

--Of coats and of jackets grey, scarlet, and green, On the slopes of the pastures all colours were seen; With their comely blue aprons, and caps white as snow, The girls on the hills made a holiday show.

Fresh sprigs of green box-wood, not six months before, Filled the funeral basin at Timothy's door; A coffin through Timothy's threshold had past; One Child did it bear, and that Child was his last.

Now fast up the dell came the noise and the fray, The horse and the horn, and the hark! hark away!

Old Timothy took up his staff, and he shut With a leisurely motion the door of his hut.

Perhaps to himself at that moment he said;

"The key I must take, for my Ellen is dead."

But of this in my ears not a word did he speak; And he went to the chase with a tear on his cheek.

William Wordsworth





Complaint Of a Forsaken Indian Woman, The Before I see another day,

Oh let my body die away!

In sleep I heard the northern gleams; The stars, they were among my dreams; In rustling conflict through the skies, I heard, I saw the flashes drive,

And yet they are upon my eyes,

And yet I am alive;

Before I see another day,

Oh let my body die away!

My fire is dead: it knew no pain;

Yet is it dead, and I remain:

All stiff with ice the ashes lie;

And they are dead, and I will die.

When I was well, I wished to live,

For clothes, for warmth, for food, and fire; But they to me no joy can give,

No pleasure now, and no desire.

Then here contented will I lie

Alone, I cannot fear to die.

Alas! ye might have dragged me on

Another day, a single one!

Too soon I yielded to despair;

Why did ye listen to my prayer

When ye were gone my limb were stronger; And oh, how grievously I rue,

That, afterward, a little longer,

My friends, I did not follow you!

For strong and without pain I lay,

Dear friends, when ye were gone away.

My Child! they gave thee to another,

A woman who was not thy mother.

When from my arms my Babe they took,

On me how strangely did he look !

Through his whole body something ran, A most strange working did I see;

---As if he strove to be a man,

That he might pull the sledge for me: And then he stretched his arm, how wild!

Oh mercy! like a helpless child.

My little joy! my little pride!

In two day more I must have died.

Then do not weep and grieve for me;

I feel I must have died with thee.

O wind, that o'er my head art flying

The way my friends their course did bend, I should not feel the pain of dying,

Could I with thee a message end;





Too soon, my friend, ye went away;

For I had many thing to say.

I'll follow you across the snow;

Ye travel heavily and slow;

In spite of all my weary pain

I'll look upon your tent again.

---My fire is dead, and snowy white

The water which beside it stood:

The wolf has come to me to-night,

And he has stolen away my food.

Forever left alone am I;

Then wherefore should I fear to die ?

Young as I am, my course is run,

I shall not see another sun;

I cannot lift my limb to know

If they have any life or no.

My poor forsaken child, if I

For once could have thee close to me, With happy heart I then would die,

And my last thought would happy be;

But thou, dear Babe, art far away,

Nor shall I see another day.

William Wordsworth





Composed During a Storm

One who was suffering tumult in his soul, Yet failed to seek the sure relief of prayer, Went forth--his course surrendering to the care Of the fierce wind, while mid-day lightnings prowl Insidiously, untimely thunders growl; While trees, dim-seen, in frenzied numbers, tear The lingering remnant of their yellow hair, And shivering wolves, surprised with darkness, howl As if the sun were not. He raised his eye Soul-smitten; for, that instant, did appear Large space ('mid dreadful clouds) of purest sky, An azure disc--shield of Tranquillity; Invisible, unlooked-for, minister

Of providential goodness ever nigh!

William Wordsworth





Composed Upon Westminster Bridge


This City now doth like a garment wear The beauty of the morning: silent, bare, Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie Open unto the fields, and to the sky,-

All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.

Never did sun more beautifully steep

In his first splendour valley, rock or hill; Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!

The river glideth at his own sweet will: Dear God! the very houses seem asleep; And all that mighty heart is lying still!

William Wordsworth






Earth has not anything to show more fair: Dull would he be of soul who could pass by A sight so touching in its majesty:

This City now doth, like a garment, wear The beauty of the morning; silent, bare, Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie Open unto the fields, and to the sky; All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.

Never did sun more beautifully steep

In his first splendour, valley, rock, or hill; Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!

The river glideth at his own sweet will: Dear God! the very houses seem asleep; And all that mighty heart is lying still!

William Wordsworth





Daffodils

I wandered lonely as a cloud

That floats on high o'er vales and hills, When all at once I saw a crowd,

A host, of golden daffodils;

Beside the lake, beneath the trees,

Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

Continuous as the stars that shine

And twinkle on the milky way,

They stretched in never-ending line

Along the margin of a bay:

Ten thousand saw I at a glance,

Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

The waves beside them danced; but they Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:

A poet could not but be gay,

In such a jocund company:

I gazed--and gazed--but little thought What wealth the show to me had brought: For oft, when on my couch I lie

In vacant or in pensive mood,

They flash upon that inward eye

Which is the bliss of solitude;

And then my heart with pleasure fills, And dances with the daffodils.

William Wordsworth





Danish Boy, The: A Fragment

I

Between two sister moorland rills

There is a spot that seems to lie

Sacred to flowerets of the hills,

And sacred to the sky.

And in this smooth and open dell

There is a tempest-stricken tree;

A corner-stone by lightning cut,

The last stone of a lonely hut;

And in this dell you see

A thing no storm can e'er destroy,

The shadow of a Danish Boy.

II

In clouds above, the lark is heard,

But drops not here to earth for rest; Within this lonesome nook the bird

Did never build her nest.

No beast, no bird hath here his home; Bees, wafted on the breezy air,

Pass high above those fragrant bells

To other flowers:--to other dells

Their burthens do they bear;

The Danish Boy walks here alone:

The lovely dell is all his own.

III

A Spirit of noon-day is he;

Yet seems a form of flesh and blood;

Nor piping shepherd shall he be,

Nor herd-boy of the wood.

A regal vest of fur he wears,

In colour like a raven's wing;

It fears not rain, nor wind, nor dew; But in the storm 'tis fresh and blue

As budding pines in spring;

His helmet has a vernal grace,

Fresh as the bloom upon his face.

IV

A harp is from his shoulder slung;

Resting the harp upon his knee,

To words of a forgotten tongue

He suits its melody.

Of flocks upon the neighbouring hill

He is the darling and the joy;

And often, when no cause appears,

The mountain-ponies prick their ears,





--They hear the Danish Boy,

While in the dell he sings alone

Beside the tree and corner-stone.

V

There sits he; in his face you spy

No trace of a ferocious air,

Nor ever was a cloudless sky

So steady or so fair.

The lovely Danish Boy is blest

And happy in his flowery cove:

From bloody deeds his thoughts are far; And yet he warbles songs of war,

That seem like songs of love,

For calm and gentle is his mien;

Like a dead Boy he is serene.

William Wordsworth





Desideria

SURPRISED by joy--impatient as the Wind I turned to share the transport--O! with whom But Thee, deep buried in the silent tomb, That spot which no vicissitude can find?

Love, faithful love, recall'd thee to my mind--

But how could I forget thee? Through what power, Even for the least division of an hour, Have I been so beguiled as to be blind To my most grievous loss?--That thought's return Was the worst pang that sorrow ever bore, Save one, one only, when I stood forlorn, Knowing my heart's best treasure was no more; That neither present time, nor years unborn Could to my sight that heavenly face restore.

William Wordsworth





Dion

. See Plutarch.

Serene, and fitted to embrace,

Where'er he turned, a swan-like grace Of haughtiness without pretence,

And to unfold a still magnificence,

Was princely Dion, in the power

And beauty of his happier hour.

And what pure homage then did wait

On Dion's virtues, while the lunar beam Of Plato's genius, from its lofty sphere, Fell round him in the grove of Academe, Softening their inbred dignity austere--

That he, not too elate

With self-sufficing solitude,

But with majestic lowliness endued,

Might in the universal bosom reign,

And from affectionate observance gain Help, under every change of adverse fate.

Five thousand warriors--O the rapturous day!

Each crowned with flowers, and armed with spear and shield, Or ruder weapon which their course might yield, To Syracuse advance in bright array.

Who leads them on?--The anxious people see Long-exiled Dion marching at their head, He also crowned with flowers of Sicily, And in a white, far-beaming, corslet clad!

Pure transport undisturbed by doubt or fear The gazers feel; and, rushing to the plain, Salute those strangers as a holy train Or blest procession (to the Immortals dear) That brought their precious liberty again.

Lo! when the gates are entered, on each hand, Down the long street, rich goblets filled with wine In seemly order stand,

On tables set, as if for rites divine;--

And, as the great Deliverer marches by, He looks on festal ground with fruits bestrown; And flowers are on his person thrown

In boundless prodigality;

Nor doth the general voice abstain from prayer, Invoking Dion's tutelary care,

As if a very Deity he were!

Mourn, hills and groves of Attica! and mourn, Ilissus, bending o'er thy classic urn!

Mourn, and lament for him whose spirit dreads Your once sweet memory, studious walks and shades!

For him who to divinity aspired,

Not on the breath of popular applause, But through dependence on the sacred laws Framed in the schools where Wisdom dwelt retired,





Intent to trace the ideal path of right (More fair than heaven's broad causeway paved with stars) Which Dion learned to measure with sublime delight;--

But He hath overleaped the eternal bars; And, following guides whose craft holds no consent With aught that breathes the ethereal element, Hath stained the robes of civil power with blood, Unjustly shed, though for the public good.

Whence doubts that came too late, and wishes vain, Hollow excuses, and triumphant pain;

And oft his cogitations sink as low

As, through the abysses of a joyless heart, The heaviest plummet of despair can go--

But whence that sudden check? that fearful start!

He hears an uncouth sound--

Anon his lifted eyes

Saw, at a long-drawn gallery's dusky bound, A Shape of more than mortal size

And hideous aspect, stalking round and round!

A woman's garb the Phantom wore,

And fiercely swept the marble floor,--

Like Auster whirling to and fro,

His force on Caspian foam to try;

Or Boreas when he scours the snow

That skims the plains of Thessaly,

Or when aloft on Mænalus he stops

His flight, 'mid eddying pine-tree tops!

So, but from toil less sign of profit reaping, The sullen Spectre to her purpose bowed, Sweeping--vehemently sweeping--

No pause admitted, no design avowed!

"Avaunt, inexplicable Guest!--avaunt,"

Exclaimed the Chieftain--"let me rather see The coronal that coiling vipers make; The torch that flames with many a lurid flake, And the long train of doleful pageantry Which they behold, whom vengeful Furies haunt; Who, while they struggle from the scourge to flee, Move where the blasted soil is not unworn, And, in their anguish, bear what other minds have borne!"

But Shapes, that come not at an earthly call, Will not depart when mortal voices bid; Lords of the visionary eye whose lid, Once raised, remains aghast, and will not fall!

Ye Gods, thought He, that servile Implement Obeys a mystical intent!

Your Minister would brush away

The spots that to my soul adhere;

But should she labour night and day,

They will not, cannot disappear;





Whence angry perturbations,--and that look Which no philosophy can brook!

Ill-fated Chief! there are whose hopes are built Upon the ruins of thy glorious name;

Who, through the portal of one moment's guilt, Pursue thee with their deadly aim!

O matchless perfidy! portentous lust

Of monstrous crime!--that horror-striking blade, Drawn in defiance of the Gods, hath laid The noble Syracusan low in dust!

Shudder'd the walls--the marble city wept--

And sylvan places heaved a pensive sigh; But in calm peace the appointed Victim slept, As he had fallen in magnanimity;

Of spirit too capacious to require

That Destiny her course should change; too just To his own native greatness to desire That wretched boon, days lengthened by mistrust.

So were the hopeless troubles, that involved The soul of Dion, instantly dissolved.

Released from life and cares of princely state, He left this moral grafted on his Fate;

"Him only pleasure leads, and peace attends, Him, only him, the shield of Jove defends, Whose means are fair and spotless as his ends."

William Wordsworth





Elegiac Stanzas

Lulled by the sound of pastoral bells, Rude Nature's Pilgrims did we go,

From the dread summit of the Queen

Of mountains, through a deep ravine,

Where, in her holy chapel, dwells

"Our Lady of the Snow."

The sky was blue, the air was mild;

Free were the streams and green the bowers; As if, to rough assaults unknown,

The genial spot had 'ever' shown

A countenance that as sweetly smiled--

The face of summer-hours.

And we were gay, our hearts at ease;

With pleasure dancing through the frame We journeyed; all we knew of care--

Our path that straggled here and there; Of trouble--but the fluttering breeze; Of Winter--but a name.

If foresight could have rent the veil Of three short days--but hush--no more!

Calm is the grave, and calmer none

Than that to which thy cares are gone, Thou Victim of the stormy gale;

Asleep on ZURICH'S shore!

O GODDARD! what art thou?--a name--

A sunbeam followed by a shade!

Nor more, for aught that time supplies, The great, the experienced, and the wise: Too much from this frail earth we claim, And therefore are betrayed.

We met, while festive mirth ran wild, Where, from a deep lake's mighty urn, Forth slips, like an enfranchised slave, A sea-green river, proud to lave,

With current swift and undefiled,

The towers of old LUCERNE.

We parted upon solemn ground

Far-lifted towards the unfading sky;

But all our thoughts were 'then' of Earth, That gives to common pleasures birth; And nothing in our hearts we found

That prompted even a sigh.

Fetch, sympathising Powers of air,

Fetch, ye that post o'er seas and lands, Herbs, moistened by Virginian dew,





A most untimely grave to strew,

Whose turf may never know the care

Of 'kindred' human hands!

Beloved by every gentle Muse

He left his Transatlantic home:

Europe, a realised romance,

Had opened on his eager glance;

What present bliss!--what golden views!

What stores for years to come!

Though lodged within no vigorous frame, His soul her daily tasks renewed,

Blithe as the lark on sun-gilt wings

High poised--or as the wren that sings In shady places, to proclaim

Her modest gratitude.

Not vain is sadly-uttered praise;

The words of truth's memorial vow

Are sweet as morning fragrance shed

From flowers 'mid GOLDAU'S ruins bred; As evening's fondly-lingering rays,

On RIGHI'S silent brow.

Lamented Youth! to thy cold clay

Fit obsequies the Stranger paid;

And piety shall guard the Stone

Which hath not left the spot unknown

Where the wild waves resigned their prey--

And 'that' which marks thy bed.

And, when thy Mother weeps for Thee,

Lost Youth! a solitary Mother;

This tribute from a casual Friend

A not unwelcome aid may lend,

To feed the tender luxury,

The rising pang to smother.

William Wordsworth





Elegiac Stanzas Suggested by a Picture of Peele Castle

. I was thy neighbour once, thou rugged Pile!

Four summer weeks I dwelt in sight of thee: I saw thee every day; and all the while Thy Form was sleeping on a glassy sea.

So pure the sky, so quiet was the air!

So like, so very like, was day to day!

Whene'er I looked, thy Image still was there; It trembled, but it never passed away.

How perfect was the calm! it seemed no sleep; No mood, which season takes away, or brings: I could have fancied that the mighty Deep Was even the gentlest of all gentle things.

Ah! then , if mine had been the Painter's hand, To express what then I saw; and add the gleam, The light that never was, on sea or land, The consecration, and the Poet's dream; I would have planted thee, thou hoary Pile Amid a world how different from this!

Beside a sea that could not cease to smile; On tranquil land, beneath a sky of bliss.

Thou shouldst have seemed a treasure-house divine Of peaceful years; a chronicle of heaven;--

Of all the sunbeams that did ever shine The very sweetest had to thee been given.

A Picture had it been of lasting ease, Elysian quiet, without toil or strife; No motion but the moving tide, a breeze, Or merely silent Nature's breathing life.

Such, in the fond illusion of my heart, Such Picture would I at that time have made: And seen the soul of truth in every part, A steadfast peace that might not be betrayed.

So once it would have been,--'tis so no more; I have submitted to a new control:

A power is gone, which nothing can restore; A deep distress hath humanised my Soul.

Not for a moment could I now behold

A smiling sea, and be what I have been: The feeling of my loss will ne'er be old; This, which I know, I speak with mind serene.

Then, Beaumont, Friend! who would have been the Friend, If he had lived, of Him whom I deplore, This work of thine I blame not, but commend; This sea in anger, and that dismal shore.





O 'tis a passionate Work!--yet wise and well, Well chosen is the spirit that is here; That Hulk which labours in the deadly swell, This rueful sky, this pageantry of fear!

And this huge Castle, standing here sublime, I love to see the look with which it braves, Cased in the unfeeling armour of old time, The lightning, the fierce wind, the trampling waves.

Farewell, farewell the heart that lives alone, Housed in a dream, at distance from the Kind!

Such happiness, wherever it be known, Is to be pitied; for 'tis surely blind.

But welcome fortitude, and patient cheer, And frequent sights of what is to be borne!

Such sights, or worse, as are before me here.--

Not without hope we suffer and we mourn.

William Wordsworth





Ellen Irwin

Fair Ellen Irwin, when she sate

Upon the braes of Kirtle,

Was lovely as a Grecian maid

Adorned with wreaths of myrtle;

Young Adam Bruce beside her lay,

And there did they beguile the day

With love and gentle speeches,

Beneath the budding beeches.

From many knights and many squires

The Bruce had been selected;

And Gordon, fairest of them all,

By Ellen was rejected.

Sad tidings to that noble Youth!

For it may be proclaimed with truth,

If Bruce hath loved sincerely,

That Gordon loves as dearly.

But what are Gordon's form and face,

His shattered hopes and crosses,

To them, 'mid Kirtle's pleasant braes, Reclined on flowers and mosses?

Alas that ever he was born!

The Gordon, couched behind a thorn,

Sees them and their caressing;

Beholds them blest and blessing.

Proud Gordon, maddened by the thoughts That through his brain are travelling, Rushed forth, and at the heart of Bruce He launched a deadly javelin!

Fair Ellen saw it as it came,

And, starting up to meet the same,

Did with her body cover

The Youth, her chosen lover.

And, falling into Bruce's arms,

Thus died the beauteous Ellen,

Thus, from the heart of her True-love, The mortal spear repelling.

And Bruce, as soon as he had slain

The Gordon, sailed away to Spain;

And fought with rage incessant

Against the Moorish crescent.

But many days, and many months,

And many years ensuing,

This wretched Knight did vainly seek

The death that he was wooing.

So, coming his last help to crave,

Heart-broken, upon Ellen's grave

His body he extended,





And there his sorrow ended.

Now ye, who willingly have heard

The tale I have been telling,

May in Kirkconnel churchyard view

The grave of lovely Ellen:

By Ellen's side the Bruce is laid;

And, for the stone upon his head,

May no rude hand deface it,

And its forlorn "Hie jacet"!

William Wordsworth





England i

O FRIEND! I know not which way I must look For comfort, being, as I am, opprest, To think that now our life is only drest For show; mean handy-work of craftsman, cook, Or groom!--We must run glittering like a brook In the open sunshine, or we are unblest: The wealthiest man among us is the best: No grandeur now in nature or in book

Delights us. Rapine, avarice, expense, This is idolatry; and these we adore: Plain living and high thinking are no more: The homely beauty of the good old cause Is gone; our peace, our fearful innocence, And pure religion breathing household laws.

William Wordsworth





England ii

MILTON! thou shouldst be living at this hour: England hath need of thee: she is a fen Of stagnant waters: altar, sword, and pen, Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower, Have forfeited their ancient English dower Of inward happiness. We are selfish men; O raise us up, return to us again,

And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power!

Thy soul was like a Star, and dwelt apart; Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea: Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free, So didst thou travel on life's common way, In cheerful godliness; and yet thy heart The lowliest duties on herself did lay.

William Wordsworth





England iii

GREAT men have been among us; hands that penn'd And tongues that utter'd wisdom--better none: The later Sidney, Marvel, Harrington, Young Vane, and others who call'd Milton friend.

These moralists could act and comprehend: They knew how genuine glory was put on; Taught us how rightfully a nation shone In splendour: what strength was, that would not bend But in magnanimous meekness. France, 'tis strange, Hath brought forth no such souls as we had then.

Perpetual emptiness! unceasing change!

No single volume paramount, no code,

No master spirit, no determined road; But equally a want of books and men!

William Wordsworth





England iv

IT is not to be thought of that the flood Of British freedom, which, to the open sea Of the world's praise, from dark antiquity Hath flow'd, 'with pomp of waters, unwithstood,'

Roused though it be full often to a mood Which spurns the check of salutary bands,--

That this most famous stream in bogs and sands Should perish; and to evil and to good Be lost for ever. In our halls is hung Armoury of the invincible Knights of old: We must be free or die, who speak the tongue That Shakespeare spake; the faith and morals hold Which Milton held.--In everything we are sprung Of Earth's first blood, have titles manifold.

William Wordsworth





England v

WHEN I have borne in memory what has tamed Great Nations, how ennobling thoughts depart When men change swords for ledgers, and desert The student's bower for gold, some fears unnamed I had, my Country!--am I to be blamed?

Now, when I think of thee, and what thou art, Verily, in the bottom of my heart,

Of those unfilial fears I am ashamed.

For dearly must we prize thee; we who find In thee a bulwark for the cause of men; And I by my affection was beguiled:

What wonder if a Poet now and then,

Among the many movements of his mind, Felt for thee as a lover or a child!

William Wordsworth





Evening on Calais Beach

IT is a beauteous evening, calm and free, The holy time is quiet as a Nun

Breathless with adoration; the broad sun Is sinking down in its tranquillity;

The gentleness of heaven broods o'er the sea: Listen! the mighty Being is awake,

And doth with his eternal motion make A sound like thunder--everlastingly.

Dear Child! dear Girl! that walkest with me here, If thou appear untouch'd by solemn thought, Thy nature is not therefore less divine: Thou liest in Abraham's bosom all the year; And worshipp'st at the Temple's inner shrine, God being with thee when we know it not.

William Wordsworth





Expostulation and Reply

"Why, William, on that old grey stone, Thus for the length of half a day,

Why, William, sit you thus alone,

And dream your time away?

"Where are your books?--that light bequeathed To Beings else forlorn and blind!

Up! up! and drink the spirit breathed From dead men to their kind.

"You look round on your Mother Earth, As if she for no purpose bore you;

As if you were her first-born birth,

And none had lived before you!"

One morning thus, by Esthwaite lake,

When life was sweet, I knew not why,

To me my good friend Matthew spake,

And thus I made reply:

"The eye--it cannot choose but see; We cannot bid the ear be still;

Our bodies feel, where'er they be,

Against or with our will.

"Nor less I deem that there are Powers Which of themselves our minds impress; That we can feed this mind of ours

In a wise passiveness.

"Think you, 'mid all this mighty sum Of things for ever speaking,

That nothing of itself will come,

But we must still be seeking?

"--Then ask not wherefore, here, alone, Conversing as I may,

I sit upon this old grey stone,

And dream my time away,"

William Wordsworth





Extempore Effusion upon the Death of James Hogg

. When first, descending from the moorlands, I saw the Stream of Yarrow glide

Along a bare and open valley,

The Ettrick Shepherd was my guide.

When last along its banks I wandered, Through groves that had begun to shed Their golden leaves upon the pathways, My steps the Border-minstrel led.

The mighty Minstrel breathes no longer,

'Mid mouldering ruins low he lies;

And death upon the braes of Yarrow,

Has closed the Shepherd-poet's eyes:

Nor has the rolling year twice measured, From sign to sign, its stedfast course, Since every mortal power of Coleridge Was frozen at its marvellous source;

The rapt One, of the godlike forehead, The heaven-eyed creature sleeps in earth: And Lamb, the frolic and the gentle,

Has vanished from his lonely hearth.

Like clouds that rake the mountain-summits, Or waves that own no curbing hand,

How fast has brother followed brother, From sunshine to the sunless land!

Yet I, whose lids from infant slumber Were earlier raised, remain to hear

A timid voice, that asks in whispers,

"Who next will drop and disappear?"

Our haughty life is crowned with darkness, Like London with its own black wreath, On which with thee, O Crabbe! forth-looking, I gazed from Hampstead's breezy heath.

As if but yesterday departed,

Thou too art gone before; but why,

O'er ripe fruit, seasonably gathered, Should frail survivors heave a sigh?

Mourn rather for that holy Spirit,

Sweet as the spring, as ocean deep;

For Her who, ere her summer faded,

Has sunk into a breathless sleep.

No more of old romantic sorrows,

For slaughtered Youth or love-lorn Maid!

With sharper grief is Yarrow smitten, And Ettrick mourns with her their Poet dead.





William Wordsworth





For The Spot Where The Hermitage Stood on St. Herbert's Island, Derwentwater.

If thou in the dear love of some one Friend Hast been so happy that thou know'st what thoughts Will sometimes in the happiness of love Make the heart sink, then wilt thou reverence This quiet spot; and, Stranger! not unmoved Wilt thou behold this shapeless heap of stones, The desolate ruins of St. Herbert's Cell.

Here stood his threshold; here was spread the roof That sheltered him, a self-secluded Man, After long exercise in social cares

And offices humane, intent to adore

The Deity, with undistracted mind,

And meditate on everlasting things,

In utter solitude.--But he had left

A Fellow-labourer, whom the good Man loved As his own soul. And, when with eye upraised To heaven he knelt before the crucifix, While o'er the lake the cataract of Lodore Pealed to his orisons, and when he paced Along the beach of this small isle and thought Of his Companion, he would pray that both (Now that their earthly duties were fulfilled) Might die in the same moment. Nor in vain So prayed he:--as our chronicles report, Though here the Hermit numbered his last day Far from St. Cuthbert his beloved Friend, Those holy Men both died in the same hour.

William Wordsworth





Foresight

That is work of waste and ruin--

Do as Charles and I are doing!

Strawberry-blossoms, one and all,

We must spare them--here are many:

Look at it--the flower is small,

Small and low, though fair as any:

Do not touch it! summers two

I am older, Anne, than you.

Pull the primrose, sister Anne!

Pull as many as you can.

--Here are daisies, take your fill;

Pansies, and the cuckoo-flower:

Of the lofty daffodil

Make your bed, or make your bower;

Fill your lap, and fill your bosom;

Only spare the strawberry-blossom!

Primroses, the Spring may love them--

Summer knows but little of them:

Violets, a barren kind,

Withered on the ground must lie;

Daisies leave no fruit behind

When the pretty flowerets die;

Pluck them, and another year

As many will be blowing here.

God has given a kindlier power

To the favoured strawberry-flower.

Hither soon as spring is fled

You and Charles and I will walk;

Lurking berries, ripe and red,

Then will hang on every stalk,

Each within its leafy bower;

And for that promise spare the flower!

William Wordsworth





Forsaken, The

The peace which other seek they find; The heaviest storms not longet last;

Heaven grants even to the guiltiest mind An amnesty for what is past;

When will my sentence be reversed?

I only pray to know the worst;

And wish as if my heart would burst.

O weary struggle! silent year

Tell seemingly no doubtful tale;

And yet they leave it short, and fear And hopes are strong and will prevail.

My calmest faith escapes not pain;

And, feeling that the hope in vain,

I think that he will come again.

William Wordsworth





Fountain, The: A Conversation

We talked with open heart, and tongue Affectionate and true,

A pair of friends, though I was young, And Matthew seventy-two.

We lay beneath a spreading oak,

Beside a mossy seat;

And from the turf a fountain broke,

And gurgled at our feet.

"Now, Matthew!" said I, "let us match This water's pleasant tune

With some old border-song, or catch

That suits a summer's noon;

"Or of the church-clock and the chimes Sing here beneath the shade,

That half-mad thing of witty rhymes

Which you last April made!"

In silence Matthew lay, and eyed

The spring beneath the tree;

And thus the dear old Man replied,

The grey-haired man of glee:

"No check, no stay, this Streamlet fears; How merrily it goes!

'Twill murmur on a thousand years,

And flow as now it flows.

"And here, on this delightful day, I cannot choose but think

How oft, a vigorous man, I lay

Beside this fountain's brink.

"My eyes are dim with childish tears, My heart is idly stirred,

For the same sound is in my ears

Which in those days I heard.

"Thus fares it still in our decay: And yet the wiser mind

Mourns less for what age takes away

Than what it leaves behind.

"The blackbird amid leafy trees, The lark above the hill,

Let loose their carols when they please Are quiet when they will.

"With Nature never do 'they' wage A foolish strife; they see





A happy youth, and their old age

Is beautiful and free:

"But we are pressed by heavy laws; And often, glad no more,

We wear a face of joy, because

We have been glad of yore.

"If there be one who need bemoan His kindred laid in earth,

The household hearts that were his own; It is the man of mirth.

"My days, my Friend, are almost gone, My life has been approved,

And many love me; but by none

Am I enough beloved."

"Now both himself and me he wrongs, The man who thus complains;

I live and sing my idle songs

Upon these happy plains;

"And, Matthew, for thy children dead I'll be a son to thee!"

At this he grasped my hand, and said,

"Alas! that cannot be."

We rose up from the fountain-side;

And down the smooth descent

Of the green sheep-track did we glide; And through the wood we went;

And, ere we came to Leonard's rock,

He sang those witty rhymes

About the crazy old church-clock,

And the bewildered chimes.

William Wordsworth





Goody Blake and Harry Gill

Oh! what's the matter? what's the matter?

What is't that ails young Harry Gill?

That evermore his teeth they chatter, Chatter, chatter, chatter still!

Of waistcoats Harry has no lack,

Good duffle grey, and flannel fine;

He has a blanket on his back,

And coats enough to smother nine.

In March, December, and in July,

'Tis all the same with Harry Gill;

The neighbours tell, and tell you truly, His teeth they chatter, chatter still.

At night, at morning, and at noon,

'Tis all the same with Harry Gill;

Beneath the sun, beneath the moon,

His teeth they chatter, chatter still!

Young Harry was a lusty drover,

And who so stout of limb as he?

His cheeks were red as ruddy clover;

His voice was like the voice of three.

Old Goody Blake was old and poor;

Ill fed she was, and thinly clad;

And any man who passed her door

Might see how poor a hut she had.

All day she spun in her poor dwelling: And then her three hours' work at night, Alas! 'twas hardly worth the telling, It would not pay for candle-light.

Remote from sheltered village-green,

On a hill's northern side she dwelt,

Where from sea-blasts the hawthorns lean, And hoary dews are slow to melt.

By the same fire to boil their pottage, Two poor old Dames, as I have known,

Will often live in one small cottage; But she, poor Woman! housed alone.

'Twas well enough when summer came,

The long, warm, lightsome summer-day, Then at her door the 'canty' Dame

Would sit, as any linnet, gay.

But when the ice our streams did fetter, Oh then how her old bones would shake!

You would have said, if you had met her,

'Twas a hard time for Goody Blake.

Her evenings then were dull and dead: Sad case it was, as you may think,

For very cold to go to bed;





And then for cold not sleep a wink.

O joy for her! whene'er in winter

The winds at night had made a rout;

And scattered many a lusty splinter

And many a rotten bough about.

Yet never had she, well or sick,

As every man who knew her says,

A pile beforehand, turf or stick,

Enough to warm her for three days.

Now, when the frost was past enduring, And made her poor old bones to ache,

Could any thing be more alluring

Than an old hedge to Goody Blake?

And, now and then, it must be said,

When her old bones were cold and chill, She left her fire, or left her bed,

To seek the hedge of Harry Gill.

Now Harry he had long suspected

This trespass of old Goody Blake;

And vowed that she should be detected--

That he on her would vengeance take.

And oft from his warm fire he'd go,

And to the fields his road would take; And there, at night, in frost and snow, He watched to seize old Goody Blake.

And once, behind a rick of barley,

Thus looking out did Harry stand:

The moon was full and shining clearly, And crisp with frost the stubble land.

--He hears a noise--he's all awake--

Again?--on tip-toe down the hill

He softly creeps--'tis Goody Blake;

She's at the hedge of Harry Gill!

Right glad was he when he beheld her: Stick after stick did Goody pull:

He stood behind a bush of elder,

Till she had filled her apron full.

When with her load she turned about,

The by-way back again to take;

He started forward, with a shout,

And sprang upon poor Goody Blake.

And fiercely by the arm he took her,

And by the arm he held her fast,

And fiercely by the arm he shook her, And cried, "I've caught you then at last!"--

Then Goody, who had nothing said,





Her bundle from her lap let fall;

And, kneeling on the sticks, she prayed To God that is the judge of all.

She prayed, her withered hand uprearing, While Harry held her by the arm--


The cold, cold moon above her head,

Thus on her knees did Goody pray;

Young Harry heard what she had said:

And icy cold he turned away.

He went complaining all the morrow

That he was cold and very chill:

His face was gloom, his heart was sorrow, Alas! that day for Harry Gill!

That day he wore a riding-coat,

But not a whit the warmer he:

Another was on Thursday brought,

And ere the Sabbath he had three.

'Twas all in vain, a useless matter,

And blankets were about him pinned;

Yet still his jaws and teeth they clatter; Like a loose casement in the wind.

And Harry's flesh it fell away;

And all who see him say, 'tis plain,

That, live as long as live he may,

He never will be warm again.

No word to any man he utters,

A-bed or up, to young or old;

But ever to himself he mutters,

"Poor Harry Gill is very cold."

A-bed or up, by night or day;

His teeth they chatter, chatter still.

Now think, ye farmers all, I pray,

Of Goody Blake and Harry Gill!

William Wordsworth





Green Linnet, The

Beneath these fruit-tree boughs that shed Their snow-white blossoms on my head, With brightest sunshine round me spread Of spring's unclouded weather,

In this sequestered nook how sweet

To sit upon my orchard-seat!

And birds and flowers once more to greet, My last year's friends together.

One have I marked, the happiest guest In all this covert of the blest:

Hail to Thee, far above the rest

In joy of voice and pinion!

Thou, Linnet! in thy green array,

Presiding Spirit here today,

Dost lead the revels of the May;

And this is thy dominion.

While bird, and butterflies, and flowers, Make all one band of paramours,

Thou, ranging up and down the bowers, Art sole in thy employment:

A Life, a Presence like the Air,

Scattering thy gladness without care, Too blest with any one to pair;

Thyself thy own enjoyment.

Amid yon tuft of hazel trees,

That twinkle to the gusty breeze,

Behold him perched in ecstasies,

Yet seeming still to hover;

There! where the flutter of his wings Upon his back and body flings

Shadows and sunny glimmerings,

That cover him all over.

My dazzled sight he oft deceives,

A Brother of the dancing leaves;

Then flits, and from the cottage eaves Pours forth his song in gushes;

As if by that exulting strain

He mocked and treated with disdain

The voiceless Form he chose to feign, While fluttering in the bushes.

William Wordsworth





Guilt and Sorrow

I

A traveller on the skirt of Sarum's Plain Pursued his vagrant way, with feet half bare; Stooping his gait, but not as if to gain Help from the staff he bore; for mien and air Were hardy, though his cheek seemed worn with care Both of the time to come, and time long fled: Down fell in straggling locks his thin grey hair; A coat he wore of military red

But faded, and stuck o'er with many a patch and shred.

II

While thus he journeyed, step by step led on, He saw and passed a stately inn, full sure That welcome in such house for him was none.

No board inscribed the needy to allure Hung there, no bush proclaimed to old and poor And desolate, "Here you will find a friend!"

The pendent grapes glittered above the door;--

On he must pace, perchance 'till night descend, Where'er the dreary roads their bare white lines extend.

III

The gathering clouds grow red with stormy fire, In streaks diverging wide and mounting high; That inn he long had passed; the distant spire, Which oft as he looked back had fixed his eye, Was lost, though still he looked, in the blank sky.

Perplexed and comfortless he gazed around, And scarce could any trace of man descry, Save cornfields stretched and stretching without bound; But where the sower dwelt was nowhere to be found.

IV

No tree was there, no meadow's pleasant green, No brook to wet his lip or soothe his ear; Long files of corn-stacks here and there were seen, But not one dwelling-place his heart to cheer.

Some labourer, thought he, may perchance be near; And so he sent a feeble shout--in vain; No voice made answer, he could only hear Winds rustling over plots of unripe grain, Or whistling thro' thin grass along the unfurrowed plain.

V

Long had he fancied each successive slope Concealed some cottage, whither he might turn





And rest; but now along heaven's darkening cope The crows rushed by in eddies, homeward borne.

Thus warned he sought some shepherd's spreading thorn Or hovel from the storm to shield his head, But sought in vain; for now, all wild, forlorn, And vacant, a huge waste around him spread; The wet cold ground, he feared, must be his only bed.

VI

And be it so--for to the chill night shower And the sharp wind his head he oft hath bared; A Sailor he, who many a wretched hour Hath told; for, landing after labour hard, Full long endured in hope of just reward, He to an armed fleet was forced away

By seamen, who perhaps themselves had shared Like fate; was hurried off, a helpless prey,

'Gainst all that in 'his' heart, or theirs perhaps, said nay.

VII

For years the work of carnage did not cease, And death's dire aspect daily he surveyed, Death's minister; then came his glad release, And hope returned, and pleasure fondly made Her dwelling in his dreams. By Fancy's aid The happy husband flies, his arms to throw Round his wife's neck; the prize of victory laid In her full lap, he sees such sweet tears flow As if thenceforth nor pain nor trouble she could know.

VIII

Vain hope! for frand took all that he had earned.

The lion roars and gluts his tawny brood Even in the desert's heart; but he, returned, Bears not to those he loves their needful food.

His home approaching, but in such a mood That from his sight his children might have run.

He met a traveller, robbed him, shed his blood; And when the miserable work was done

He fled, a vagrant since, the murderer's fate to shun.

IX

From that day forth no place to him could be So lonely, but that thence might come a pang Brought from without to inward misery.

Now, as he plodded on, with sullen clang A sound of chains along the desert rang; He looked, and saw upon a gibbet high





A human body that in irons swang,

Uplifted by the tempest whirling by;

And, hovering, round it often did a raven fly.

X

It was a spectacle which none might view, In spot so savage, but with shuddering pain; Nor only did for him at once renew

All he had feared from man, but roused a train Of the mind's phantoms, horrible as vain.

The stones, as if to cover him from day, Rolled at his back along the living plain; He fell, and without sense or motion lay; But, when the trance was gone, feebly pursued his way.

XI

As one whose brain habitual phrensy fires Owes to the fit in which his soul hath tossed Profounder quiet, when the fit retires, Even so the dire phantasma which had crossed His sense, in sudden vacancy quite lost, Left his mind still as a deep evening stream.

Nor, if accosted now, in thought engrossed, Moody, or inly troubled, would he seem To traveller who might talk of any casual theme.

XII

Hurtle the clouds in deeper darkness piled, Gone is the raven timely rest to seek; He seemed the only creature in the wild On whom the elements their rage might wreak; Save that the bustard, of those regions bleak Shy tenant, seeing by the uncertain light A man there wandering, gave a mournful shriek, And half upon the ground, with strange affright, Forced hard against the wind a thick unwieldy flight.

XIII

All, all was cheerless to the horizon's bound; The weary eye--which, wheresoe'er it strays, Marks nothing but the red sun's setting round, Or on the earth strange lines, in former days Left by gigantic arms--at length surveys What seems an antique castle spreading wide; Hoary and naked are its walls, and raise Their brow sublime: in shelter there to bide He turned, while rain poured down smoking on every side.





XIV

Pile of Stone-henge! so proud to hint yet keep Thy secrets, thou that lov'st to stand and hear The Plain resounding to the whirlwind's sweep, Inmate of lonesome Nature's endless year; Even if thou saw'st the giant wicker rear For sacrifice its throngs of living men, Before thy face did ever wretch appear, Who in his heart had groaned with deadlier pain Than he who, tempest-driven, thy shelter now would gain.

XV

Within that fabric of mysterious form, Winds met in conflict, each by turns supreme; And, from the perilous ground dislodged, through storm And rain he wildered on, no moon to stream From gulf of parting clouds one friendly beam, Nor any friendly sound his footsteps led; Once did the lightning's faint disastrous gleam Disclose a naked guide-post's double head, Sight which tho' lost at once a gleam of pleasure shed.

XVI

No swinging sign-board creaked from cottage elm To stay his steps with faintness overcome;

'Twas dark and void as ocean's watery realm Roaring with storms beneath night's starless gloom; No gipsy cowered o'er fire of furze or broom; No labourer watched his red kiln glaring bright, Nor taper glimmered dim from sick man's room; Along the waste no line of mournful light From lamp of lonely toll-gate streamed athwart the night.

XVII

At length, though hid in clouds, the moon arose; The downs were visible--and now revealed A structure stands, which two bare slopes enclose.

It was a spot, where, ancient vows fulfilled, Kind pious hands did to the Virgin build A lonely Spital, the belated swain

From the night terrors of that waste to shield: But there no human being could remain, And now the walls are named the "Dead House" of the plain.

XVIII

Though he had little cause to love the abode Of man, or covet sight of mortal face,





Yet when faint beams of light that ruin showed, How glad he was at length to find some trace Of human shelter in that dreary place.

Till to his flock the early shepherd goes, Here shall much-needed sleep his frame embrace.

In a dry nook where fern the floor bestrows He lays his stiffened limbs,--his eyes begin to close; XIX

When hearing a deep sigh, that seemed to come From one who mourned in sleep, he raised his head, And saw a woman in the naked room

Outstretched, and turning on a restless bed: The moon a wan dead light around her shed.

He waked her--spake in tone that would not fail, He hoped, to calm her mind; but ill he sped, For of that ruin she had heard a tale Which now with freezing thoughts did all her powers assail; XX

Had heard of one who, forced from storms to shroud, Felt the loose walls of this decayed Retreat Rock to incessant neighings shrill and loud, While his horse pawed the floor with furious heat; Till on a stone, that sparkled to his feet, Struck, and still struck again, the troubled horse: The man half raised the stone with pain and sweat, Half raised, for well his arm might lose its force Disclosing the grim head of a late murdered corse.

XXI

Such tale of this lone mansion she had learned And, when that shape, with eyes in sleep half drowned, By the moon's sullen lamp she first discerned, Cold stony horror all her senses bound.

Her he addressed in words of cheering sound; Recovering heart, like answer did she make; And well it was that, of the corse there found, In converse that ensued she nothing spake; She knew not what dire pangs in him such tale could wake.

XXII

But soon his voice and words of kind intent Banished that dismal thought; and now the wind In fainter howlings told its 'rage' was spent: Meanwhile discourse ensued of various kind, Which by degrees a confidence of mind And mutual interest failed not to create.





And, to a natural sympathy resigned,

In that forsaken building where they sate The Woman thus retraced her own untoward fate.

XXIII

"By Derwent's side my father dwelt--a man Of virtuous life, by pious parents bred; And I believe that, soon as I began

To lisp, he made me kneel beside my bed, And in his hearing there my prayers I said: And afterwards, by my good father taught, I read, and loved the books in which I read; For books in every neighbouring house I sought, And nothing to my mind a sweeter pleasure brought.

XXIV

"A little croft we owned--a plot of corn, A garden stored with peas, and mint, and thyme, And flowers for posies, oft on Sunday morn Plucked while the church bells rang their earliest chime.

Can I forget our freaks at shearing time!

My hen's rich nest through long grass scarce espied; The cowslip-gathering in June's dewy prime; The swans that with white chests upreared in pride Rushing and racing came to meet me at the water-side.

XXV

"The staff I well remember which upbore The bending body of my active sire;

His seat beneath the honied sycamore

Where the bees hummed, and chair by winter fire; When market-morning came, the neat attire With which, though bent on haste, myself I decked; Our watchful house-dog, that would tease and tire The stranger till its barking-fit I checked; The red-breast, known for years, which at my casement pecked.

XXVI

"The suns of twenty summers danced along,--

Too little marked how fast they rolled away: But, through severe mischance and cruel wrong, My father's substance fell into decay: We toiled and struggled, hoping for a day When Fortune might put on a kinder look; But vain were wishes, efforts vain as they; He from his old hereditary nook

Must part; the summons came;--our final leave we took.





XXVII

"It was indeed a miserable hour

When, from the last hill-top, my sire surveyed, Peering above the trees, the steeple tower That on his marriage day sweet music made!

Tilt then, he hoped his bones might there be laid Close by my mother in their native bowers: Bidding me trust in God, he stood and prayed;--

I could not pray:--through tears that fell in showers Glimmered our dear-loved home, alas! no longer ours!

XXVIII

"There was a Youth whom I had loved so long, That when I loved him not I cannot say:

'Mid the green mountains many a thoughtless song We two had sung, like gladsome birds in May; When we began to tire of childish play, We seemed still more and more to prize each other; We talked of marriage and our marriage day; And I in truth did love him like a brother, For never could I hope to meet with such another.

XXIX

"Two years were passed since to a distant town He had repaired to ply a gainful trade: What tears of bitter grief, till then unknown!

What tender vows, our last sad kiss delayed!

To him we turned:--we had no other aid: Like one revived, upon his neck I wept; And her whom he had loved in joy, he said, He well could love in grief; his faith he kept; And in a quiet home once more my father slept.

XXX

"We lived in peace and comfort; and were blest With daily bread, by constant toil supplied.

Three lovely babes had lain upon my breast; And often, viewing their sweet smiles, I sighed, And knew not why. My happy father died, When threatened war reduced the children's meal: Thrice happy! that for him the grave could hide The empty loom, cold hearth, and silent wheel, And tears that flowed for ills which patience might not heal.

XXXI

"'Twas a hard change; an evil time was come; We had no hope, and no relief could gain:





But soon, with proud parade, the noisy drum Beat round to clear the streets of want and pain.

My husband's arms now only served to strain Me and his children hungering in his view; In such dismay my prayers and tears were vain: To join those miserable men he flew,

And now to the sea-coast, with numbers more, we drew.

XXXII

"There were we long neglected, and we bore Much sorrow ere the fleet its anchor weighed; Green fields before us, and our native shore, We breathed a pestilential air, that made Ravage for which no knell was heard. We prayed For our departure; wished and wished--nor knew,

'Mid that long sickness and those hopes delayed, That happier days we never more must view.

The parting signal streamed--at last the land withdrew.

XXXIII

"But the calm summer season now was past.

On as we drove, the equinoctial deep

Ran mountains high before the howling blast, And many perished in the whirlwind's sweep.

We gazed with terror on their gloomy sleep, Untaught that soon such anguish must ensue, Our hopes such harvest of affliction reap, That we the mercy of the waves should rue: We reached the western world, a poor devoted crew.

XXXIV

"The pains and plagues that on our heads came down, Disease and famine, agony and fear,

In wood or wilderness, in camp or town, It would unman the firmest heart to hear.

All perished--all in one remorseless year, Husband and children! one by one, by sword And ravenous plague, all perished: every tear Dried up, despairing, desolate, on board A British ship I waked, as from a trance restored."

XXXV

Here paused she of all present thought forlorn, Nor voice nor sound, that moment's pain expressed, Yet Nature, with excess of grief o'erborne, From her full eyes their watery load released.

He too was mute; and, ere her weeping ceased, He rose, and to the ruin's portal went,





And saw the dawn opening the silvery east With rays of promise, north and southward sent; And soon with crimson fire kindled the firmament.

XXXVI

"O come," he cried, "come, after weary night Of such rough storm, this happy change to view."

So forth she came, and eastward looked; the sight Over her brow like dawn of gladness threw; Upon her cheek, to which its youthful hue Seemed to return, dried the last lingering tear, And from her grateful heart a fresh one drew: The whilst her comrade to her pensive cheer Tempered fit words of hope; and the lark warbled near.

XXXVII

They looked and saw a lengthening road, and wain That rang down a bare slope not far remote: The barrows glistered bright with drops of rain, Whistled the waggoner with merry note, The cock far off sounded his clarion throat; But town, or farm, or hamlet, none they viewed, Only were told there stood a lonely cot A long mile thence. While thither they pursued Their way, the Woman thus her mournful tale renewed.

XXXVIII

"Peaceful as this immeasurable plain Is now, by beams of dawning light imprest, In the calm sunshine slept the glittering main; The very ocean hath its hour of rest.

I too forgot the heavings of my breast.

How quiet 'round me ship and ocean were!

As quiet all within me. I was blest,

And looked, and fed upon the silent air Until it seemed to bring a joy to my despair.

XXXIX

"Ah! how unlike those late terrific sleeps, And groans that rage of racking famine spoke; The unburied dead that lay in festering heaps, The breathing pestilence that rose like smoke, The shriek that from the distant battle broke, The mine's dire earthquake, and the pallid host Driven by the bomb's incessant thunderstroke To loathsome vaults, where heart-sick anguish tossed, Hope died, and fear itself in agony was lost!





XL

"Some mighty gulf of separation past, I seemed transported to another world; A thought resigned with pain, when from the mast The impatient mariner the sail unfurled, And, whistling, called the wind that hardly curled The silent sea. From the sweet thoughts of home And from all hope I was for ever hurled.

For me--farthest from earthly port to roam Was best, could I but shun the spot where man might come.

XLI

"And oft I thought (my fancy was so strong) That I, at last, a resting-place had found;

'Here will I dwell,' said I, 'my whole life long, Roaming the illimitable waters round; Here will I live, of all but heaven disowned, And end my days upon the peaceful flood.'--

To break my dream the vessel reached its bound; And homeless near a thousand homes I stood, And near a thousand tables pined and wanted food.

XLII

"No help I sought; in sorrow turned adrift, Was hopeless, as if cast on some bare rock; Nor morsel to my mouth that day did lift, Nor raised my hand at any door to knock.

I lay where, with his drowsy mates, the cock From the cross-timber of an out-house hung: Dismally tolled, that night, the city clock!

At morn my sick heart hunger scarcely stung, Nor to the beggar's language could I fit my tongue.

XLIII

"So passed a second day; and, when the third Was come, I tried in vain the crowd's resort.

--In deep despair, by frightful wishes stirred, Near the sea-side I reached a ruined fort; There, pains which nature could no more support, With blindness linked, did on my vitals fall; And, after many interruptions short

Of hideous sense, I sank, nor step could crawl: Unsought for was the help that did my life recall.

XLIV

"Borne to a hospital, I lay with brain Drowsy and weak, and shattered memory;





I heard my neighbours in their beds complain Of many things which never troubled me--

Of feet still bustling round with busy glee, Of looks where common kindness had no part, Of service done with cold formality,

Fretting the fever round the languid heart, And groans which, as they said, might make a dead man start.

XLV

"These things just served to stir the slumbering sense, Nor pain nor pity in my bosom raised.

With strength did memory return; and, thence Dismissed, again on open day I gazed, At houses, men, and common light, amazed.

The lanes I sought, and, as the sun retired, Came where beneath the trees a faggot blazed, The travellers saw me weep, my fate inquired, And gave me food--and rest, more welcome, more desired.

XLVI

"Rough potters seemed they, trading soberly With panniered asses driven from door to door; But life of happier sort set forth to me, And other joys my fancy to allure--

The bag-pipe dinning on the midnight moor In barn uplighted; and companions boon, Well met from far with revelry secure Among the forest glades, while jocund June Rolled fast along the sky his warm and genial moon.

XLVII

"But ill they suited me--those journeys dark O'er moor and mountain, midnight theft to hatch!

To charm the surly house-dog's faithful bark, Or hang on tip-toe at the lifted latch.

The gloomy lantern, and the dim blue match, The black disguise, the warning whistle shrill, And ear still busy on its nightly watch, Were not for me, brought up in nothing ill: Besides, on griefs so fresh my thoughts were brooding still.

XLVIII

"What could I do, unaided and unblest?

My father! gone was every friend of thine: And kindred of dead husband are at best Small help; and, after marriage such as mine, With little kindness would to me incline.

Nor was I then for toil or service fit;





My deep-drawn sighs no effort could confine; In open air forgetful would I sit

Whole hours, with idle arms in moping sorrow knit.

XLIX

"The roads I paced, I loitered through the fields; Contentedly, yet sometimes self-accused.

Trusted my life to what chance bounty yields, Now coldly given, now utterly refused.

The ground I for my bed have often used: But what afflicts my peace with keenest ruth, Is that I have my inner self abused,

Foregone the home delight of constant truth, And clear and open soul, so prized in fearless youth.

L

"Through tears the rising sun I oft have viewed, Through tears have seen him towards that world descend Where my poor heart lost all its fortitude: Three years a wanderer now my course I bend--

Oh! tell me whither--for no earthly friend Have I."--She ceased, and weeping turned away; As if because her tale was at an end, She wept; because she had no more to say Of that perpetual weight which on her spirit lay.

LI

True sympathy the Sailor's looks expressed, His looks--for pondering he was mute the while.

Of social Order's care for wretchedness, Of Time's sure help to calm and reconcile, Joy's second spring and Hope's long-treasured smile,

'Twas not for 'him' to speak--a man so tried, Yet, to relieve her heart, in friendly style Proverbial words of comfort he applied, And not in vain, while they went pacing side by side.

LII

Ere long, from heaps of turf, before their sight, Together smoking in the sun's slant beam, Rise various wreaths that into one unite Which high and higher mounts with silver gleam: Fair spectacle,---but instantly a scream Thence bursting shrill did all remark prevent; They paused, and heard a hoarser voice blaspheme, And female cries. Their course they thither bent, And met a man who foamed with anger vehement,





LIII

A woman stood with quivering lips and pale, And, pointing to a little child that lay Stretched on the ground, began a piteous tale; How in a simple freak of thoughtless play He had provoked his father, who straightway, As if each blow were deadlier than the last, Struck the poor innocent. Pallid with dismay The Soldier's Widow heard and stood aghast; And stern looks on the man her grey-haired Comrade cast.

LIV

His voice with indignation rising high Such further deed in manhood's name forbade; The peasant, wild in passion, made reply With bitter insult and revilings sad; Asked him in scorn what business there he had; What kind of plunder he was hunting now; The gallows would one day of him be glad;--

Though inward anguish damped the Sailor's brow, Yet calm he seemed as thoughts so poignant would allow.

LV

Softly he stroked the child, who lay outstretched With face to earth; and, as the boy turned round His battered head, a groan the Sailor fetched As if he saw--there and upon that ground--

Strange repetition of the deadly wound He had himself inflicted. Through his brain At once the griding iron passage found; Deluge of tender thoughts then rushed amain, Nor could his sunken eyes the starting tear restrain.

LVI

Within himself he said--What hearts have we!

The blessing this a father gives his child!

Yet happy thou, poor boy! compared with me, Suffering not doing ill--fate far more mild.

The stranger's looks and tears of wrath beguiled The father, and relenting thoughts awoke; He kissed his son--so all was reconciled.

Then, with a voice which inward trouble broke Ere to his lips it came, the Sailor them bespoke.

LVII

"Bad is the world, and hard is the world's law Even for the man who wears the warmest fleece;





Much need have ye that time more closely draw The bond of nature, all unkindness cease, And that among so few there still be peace: Else can ye hope but with such numerous foes Your pains shall ever with your years increase?"--

While from his heart the appropriate lesson flows, A correspondent calm stole gently o'er his woes.

LVIII

Forthwith the pair passed on; and down they look Into a narrow valley's pleasant scene Where wreaths of vapour tracked a winding brook, That babbled on through groves and meadows green; A low-roofed house peeped out the trees between; The dripping groves resound with cheerful lays, And melancholy lowings intervene

Of scattered herds, that in the meadow graze, Some amid lingering shade, some touched by the sun's rays.

LIX

They saw and heard, and, winding with the road, Down a thick wood, they dropt into the vale; Comfort, by prouder mansions unbestowed, Their wearied frames, she hoped, would soon regale.

Erelong they reached that cottage in the dale: It was a rustic inn;--the board was spread, The milk-maid followed with her brimming pail, And lustily the master carved the bread, Kindly the housewife pressed, and they in comfort fed.

LX

Their breakfast done, the pair, though loth, must part; Wanderers whose course no longer now agrees.

She rose and bade farewell! and, while her heart Struggled with tears nor could its sorrow ease, She left him there; for, clustering round his knees, With his oak-staff the cottage children played; And soon she reached a spot o'erhung with trees And banks of ragged earth; beneath the shade Across the pebbly road a little runnel strayed.

LXI

A cart and horse beside the rivulet stood; Chequering the canvas roof the sunbeams shone.

She saw the carman bend to scoop the flood As the wain fronted her,--wherein lay one, A pale-faced Woman, in disease far gone.

The carman wet her lips as well behoved;





Bed under her lean body there was none, Though even to die near one she most had loved She could not of herself those wasted limbs have moved.

LXII

The Soldier's Widow learned with honest pain And homefelt force of sympathy sincere, Why thus that worn-out wretch must there sustain The jolting road and morning air severe.

The wain pursued its way; and following near In pure compassion she her steps retraced Far as the cottage. "A sad sight is here,"

She cried aloud; and forth ran out in haste The friends whom she had left but a few minutes past.

LXIII

While to the door with eager speed they ran, From her bare straw the Woman half upraised Her bony visage--gaunt and deadly wan; No pity asking, on the group she gazed With a dim eye, distracted and amazed; Then sank upon her straw with feeble moan.

Fervently cried the housewife--"God be praised, I have a house that I can call my own; Nor shall she perish there, untended and alone!"

LXIV

So in they bear her to the chimney seat, And busily, though yet with fear, untie Her garments, and, to warm her icy feet And chafe her temples, careful hands apply.

Nature reviving, with a deep-drawn sigh She strove, and not in vain, her head to rear; Then said--"I thank you all; if I must die, The God in heaven my prayers for you will hear; Till now I did not think my end had been so near.

LXV

"Barred every comfort labour could procure, Suffering what no endurance could assuage, I was compelled to seek my father's door, Though loth to be a burthen on his age.

But sickness stopped me in an early stage Of my sad journey; and within the wain They placed me--there to end life's pilgrimage, Unless beneath your roof I may remain; For I shall never see my father's door again.





LXVI

"My life, Heaven knows, hath long been burthensome; But, if I have not meekly suffered, meek May my end be! Soon will this voice be dumb: Should child of mine e'er wander hither, speak Of me, say that the worm is on my cheek.--

Torn from our hut, that stood beside the sea Near Portland lighthouse in a lonesome creek, My husband served in sad captivity

On shipboard, bound till peace or death should set him free.

LXVII

"A sailor's wife I knew a widow's cares, Yet two sweet little ones partook my bed; Hope cheered my dreams, and to my daily prayers Our heavenly Father granted each day's bread; Till one was found by stroke of violence dead, Whose body near our cottage chanced to lie; A dire suspicion drove us from our shed; In vain to find a friendly face we try, Nor could we live together those poor boys and I; LXVIII

"For evil tongues made oath how on that day My husband lurked about the neighbourhood; Now he had fled, and whither none could say, And 'he' had done the deed in the dark wood--

Near his own home!--but he was mild and good; Never on earth was gentler creature seen; He'd not have robbed the raven of its food.

My husband's lovingkindness stood between Me and all worldly harms and wrongs however keen."

LXIX

Alas! the thing she told with labouring breath The Sailor knew too well. That wickedness His hand had wrought; and when, in the hour of death, He saw his Wife's lips move his name to bless With her last words, unable to suppress His anguish, with his heart he ceased to strive; And, weeping loud in this extreme distress, He cried--"Do pity me! That thou shouldst live I neither ask nor wish--forgive me, but forgive!"

LXX

To tell the change that Voice within her wrought Nature by sign or sound made no essay;





A sudden joy surprised expiring thought, And every mortal pang dissolved away.

Borne gently to a bed, in death she lay; Yet still while over her the husband bent, A look was in her face which seemed to say,

"Be blest; by sight of thee from heaven was sent Peace to my parting soul, the fulness of content."

LXXI

'She' slept in peace,--his pulses throbbed and stopped, Breathless he gazed upon her face,--then took Her hand in his, and raised it, but both dropped, When on his own he cast a rueful look.

His ears were never silent; sleep forsook His burning eyelids stretched and stiff as lead; All night from time to time under him shook The floor as he lay shuddering on his bed; And oft he groaned aloud, "O God, that I were dead!"

LXXII

The Soldier's Widow lingered in the cot, And, when he rose, he thanked her pious care Through which his Wife, to that kind shelter brought, Died in his arms; and with those thanks a prayer He breathed for her, and for that merciful pair.

The corse interred, not one hour heremained Beneath their roof, but to the open air A burthen, now with fortitude sustained, He bore within a breast where dreadful quiet reigned.

LXXIII

Confirmed of purpose, fearlessly prepared For act and suffering, to the city straight He journeyed, and forthwith his crime declared:

"And from your doom," he added, "now I wait, Nor let it linger long, the murderer's fate."

Not ineffectual was that piteous claim:

"O welcome sentence which will end though late,"

He said, "the pangs that to my conscience came Out of that deed. My trust, Saviour! is in thy name!"

LXXIV

His fate was pitied. Him in iron case (Reader, forgive the intolerable thought) They hung not:--no one on 'his' form or face Could gaze, as on a show by idlers sought; No kindred sufferer, to his death-place brought By lawless curiosity or chance,





When into storm the evening sky is wrought, Upon his swinging corse an eye can glance, And drop, as he once dropped, in miserable trance.

William Wordsworth





Hart-Leap Well

The Knight had ridden down from Wensley Moor With the slow motion of a summer's cloud, And now, as he approached a vassal's door,

"Bring forth another horse!" he cried aloud.

"Another horse!"--That shout the vassal heard And saddled his best Steed, a comely grey; Sir Walter mounted him; he was the third Which he had mounted on that glorious day.

Joy sparkled in the prancing courser's eyes; The horse and horseman are a happy pair; But, though Sir Walter like a falcon flies, There is a doleful silence in the air.

A rout this morning left Sir Walter's Hall, That as they galloped made the echoes roar; But horse and man are vanished, one and all; Such race, I think, was never seen before.

Sir Walter, restless as a veering wind, Calls to the few tired dogs that yet remain: Blanch, Swift, and Music, noblest of their kind, Follow, and up the weary mountain strain.

The Knight hallooed, he cheered and chid them on With suppliant gestures and upbraidings stern; But breath and eyesight fail; and, one by one, The dogs are stretched among the mountain fern.

Where is the throng, the tumult of the race?

The bugles that so joyfully were blown?

--This chase it looks not like an earthly chase; Sir Walter and the Hart are left alone.

The poor Hart toils along the mountainside; I will not stop to tell how far he fled, Nor will I mention by what death he died; But now the Knight beholds him lying dead.

Dismounting, then, he leaned against a thorn; He had no follower, dog, nor man, nor boy: He neither cracked his whip, nor blew his horn, But gazed upon the spoil with silent joy.

Close to the thorn on which Sir Walter leaned, Stood his dumb partner in this glorious feat; Weak as a lamb the hour that it is yeaned; And white with foam as if with cleaving sleet.

Upon his side the Hart was lying stretched: His nostril touched a spring beneath a hill,





And with the last deep groan his breath had fetched The waters of the spring were trembling still.

And now, too happy for repose or rest, (Never had living man such joyful lot!) Sir Walter walked all round, north, south, and west, And gazed and gazed upon that darling spot.

And climbing up the hill--(it was at least Four roods of sheer ascent) Sir Walter found Three several hoof-marks which the hunted Beast Had left imprinted on the grassy ground.

Sir Walter wiped his face, and cried, "Till now Such sight was never seen by human eyes: Three leaps have borne him from this lofty brow, Down to the very fountain where he lies.

"I'll build a pleasure-house upon this spot, And a small arbour, made for rural joy;

'Twill be the traveller's shed, the pilgrim's cot, A place of love for damsels that are coy.

"A cunning artist will I have to frame A basin for that fountain in the dell!

And they who do make mention of the same, From this day forth, shall call it HART-LEAP WELL.

"And, gallant Stag! to make thy praises known, Another monument shall here be raised; Three several pillars, each a rough-hewn stone, And planted where thy hoofs the turf have grazed.

"And, in the summer-time when days are long, I will come hither with my Paramour;

And with the dancers and the minstrel's song We will make merry in that pleasant bower.

"Till the foundations of the mountains fail My mansion with its arbour shall endure;--

The joy of them who till the fields of Swale, And them who dwell among the woods of Ure!"

Then home he went, and left the Hart, stone-dead, With breathless nostrils stretched above the spring.

--Soon did the Knight perform what he had said; And far and wide the fame thereof did ring.

Ere thrice the Moon into her port had steered, A cup of stone received the living well; Three pillars of rude stone Sir Walter reared, And built a house of pleasure in the dell.





And near the fountain, flowers of stature tall With trailing plants and trees were intertwined,--

Which soon composed a little sylvan hall, A leafy shelter from the sun and wind.

And thither, when the summer days were long, Sir Walter led his wondering Paramour; And with the dancers and the minstrel's song Made merriment within that pleasant bower.

The Knight, Sir Walter, died in course of time, And his bones lie in his paternal vale.--

But there is matter for a second rhyme, And I to this would add another tale.

PART SECOND

THE moving accident is not my trade;

To freeze the blood I have no ready arts:


As I from Hawes to Richmond did repair, It chanced that I saw standing in a dell Three aspens at three corners of a square; And one, not four yards distant, near a well.

What this imported I could ill divine: And, pulling now the rein my horse to stop, I saw three pillars standing in a line,--

The last stone-pillar on a dark hill-top.

The trees were grey, with neither arms nor head; Half wasted the square mound of tawny green; So that you just might say, as then I said,

"Here in old time the hand of man hath been."

I looked upon the hill both far and near, More doleful place did never eye survey; It seemed as if the spring-time came not here, And Nature here were willing to decay.

I stood in various thoughts and fancies lost, When one, who was in shepherd's garb attired, Came up the hollow:--him did I accost, And what this place might be I then inquired.

The Shepherd stopped, and that same story told Which in my former rhyme I have rehearsed.

"A jolly place," said he, "in times of old!

But something ails it now: the spot is curst.





"You see these lifeless stumps of aspen wood--

Some say that they are beeches, others elms--

These were the bower; and here a mansion stood, The finest palace of a hundred realms!

"The arbour does its own condition tell; You see the stones, the fountain, and the stream; But as to the great Lodge! you might as well Hunt half a day for a forgotten dream.

"There's neither dog nor heifer, horse nor sheep, Will wet his lips within that cup of stone; And oftentimes, when all are fast asleep, This water doth send forth a dolorous groan.

"Some say that here a murder has been done, And blood cries out for blood: but, for my part, I've guessed, when I've been sitting in the sun, That it was all for that unhappy Hart.

"What thoughts must through the creature's brain have past!

Even from the topmost stone, upon the steep, Are but three bounds--and look, Sir, at this last--

O Master! it has been a cruel leap.

"For thirteen hours he ran a desperate race; And in my simple mind we cannot tell

What cause the Hart might have to love this place, And come and make his deathbed near the well.

"Here on the grass perhaps asleep he sank, Lulled by the fountain in the summer-tide; This water was perhaps the first he drank When he had wandered from his mother's side.

"In April here beneath the flowering thorn He heard the birds their morning carols sing; And he, perhaps, for aught we know, was born Not half a furlong from that self-same spring.

"Now, here is neither grass nor pleasant shade; The sun on drearier hollow never shone; So will it be, as I have often said,

Till trees, and stones, and fountain, all are gone."

"Grey-headed Shepherd, thou hast spoken well; Small difference lies between thy creed and mine: This Beast not unobserved by Nature fell; His death was mourned by sympathy divine.

"The Being, that is in the clouds and air,





That is in the green leaves among the groves, Maintains a deep and reverential care For the unoffending creatures whom he loves.

"The pleasure-house is dust:--behind, before, This is no common waste, no common gloom; But Nature, in due course of time, once more Shall here put on her beauty and her bloom.

"She leaves these objects to a slow decay, That what we are, and have been, may be known; But at the coming of the milder day,

These monuments shall all be overgrown.

"One lesson, Shepherd, let us two divide, Taught both by what she shows, and what conceals; Never to blend our pleasure or our pride With sorrow of the meanest thing that feels."

William Wordsworth





Her Eyes are Wild

I

Her eyes are wild, her head is bare,

The sun has burnt her coal-black hair; Her eyebrows have a rusty stain,

And she came far from over the main.

She has a baby on her arm,

Or else she were alone:

And underneath the hay-stack warm,

And on the greenwood stone,

She talked and sung the woods among,

And it was in the English tongue.

II

"Sweet babe! they say that I am mad, But nay, my heart is far too glad;

And I am happy when I sing

Full many a sad and doleful thing:

Then, lovely baby, do not fear!

I pray thee have no fear of me;

But safe as in a cradle, here,

My lovely baby! thou shalt be:

To thee I know too much I owe;

I cannot work thee any woe.

III

"A fire was once within my brain; And in my head a dull, dull pain;

And fiendish faces, one, two, three,

Hung at my breast, and pulled at me;

But then there came a sight of joy;

It came at once to do me good;

I waked, and saw my little boy,

My little boy of flesh and blood;

Oh joy for me that sight to see!

For he was here, and only he.

IV

"Suck, little babe, oh suck again!

It cools my blood; it cools my brain; Thy lips I feel them, baby! they

Draw from my heart the pain away.

Oh! press me with thy little hand;

It loosens something at my chest;

About that tight and deadly band

I feel thy little fingers prest.

The breeze I see is in the tree:

It comes to cool my babe and me.





V

"Oh! love me, love me, little boy!

Thou art thy mother's only joy;

And do not dread the waves below,

When o'er the sea-rock's edge we go;

The high crag cannot work me harm,

Nor leaping torrents when they howl;

The babe I carry on my arm,

He saves for me my precious soul;

Then happy lie; for blest am I;

Without me my sweet babe would die.

VI

"Then do not fear, my boy! for thee Bold as a lion will I be;

And I will always be thy guide,

Through hollow snows and rivers wide.

I'll build an Indian bower; I know

The leaves that make the softest bed: And, if from me thou wilt not go,

But still be true till I am dead,

My pretty thing! then thou shalt sing As merry as the birds in spring.

VII

"Thy father cares not for my breast,

'Tis thine, sweet baby, there to rest;

'Tis all thine own!--and, if its hue

Be changed, that was so fair to view,

'Tis fair enough for thee, my dove!

My beauty, little child, is flown,

But thou wilt live with me in love,

And what if my poor cheek be brown?

'Tis well for me, thou canst not see

How pale and wan it else would be.

VIII

"Dread not their taunts, my little Life; I am thy father's wedded wife;

And underneath the spreading tree

We two will live in honesty.

If his sweet boy he could forsake,

With me he never would have stayed:

From him no harm my babe can take;

But he, poor man! is wretched made;

And every day we two will pray

For him that's gone and far away.





IX

"I'll teach my boy the sweetest things: I'll teach him how the owlet sings.

My little babe! thy lips are still,

And thou hast almost sucked thy fill.

--Where art thou gone, my own dear child?

What wicked looks are those I see?

Alas! alas! that look so wild,

It never, never came from me:

If thou art mad, my pretty lad,

Then I must be for ever sad.

X

"Oh! smile on me, my little lamb!

For I thy own dear mother am:

My love for thee has well been tried: I've sought thy father far and wide.

I know the poisons of the shade;

I know the earth-nuts fit for food:

Then, pretty dear, be not afraid:

We'll find thy father in the wood.

Now laugh and be gay, to the woods away!

And there, my babe, we'll live for aye."

William Wordsworth





I Know an Old Man Constrained to Dwell I know an aged Man constrained to dwell In a large house of public charity,

Where he abides, as in a Prisoner's cell, With numbers near, alas! no company.

When he could creep about, at will, though poor And forced to live on alms, this old Man fed A Redbreast, one that to his cottage door Came not, but in a lane partook his bread.

There, at the root of one particular tree, An easy seat this worn-out Labourer found While Robin pecked the crumbs upon his knee Laid one by one, or scattered on the ground.

Dear intercourse was theirs, day after day; What signs of mutual gladness when they met!

Think of their common peace, their simple play, The parting moment and its fond regret.

Months passed in love that failed not to fulfil, In spite of season's change, its own demand, By fluttering pinions here and busy bill; There by caresses from a tremulous hand.

Thus in the chosen spot a tie so strong Was formed between the solitary pair, That when his fate had housed him 'mid a throng The Captive shunned all converse proffered there.

Wife, children, kindred, they were dead and gone; But, if no evil hap his wishes crossed, One living Stay was left, and on that one Some recompence for all that he had lost.

Oh that the good old Man had power to prove, By message sent through air or visible token, That still he loves the Bird, and still must love; That friendship lasts though fellowship is broken!

William Wordsworth





I Travelled Among Unknown Men

I travelled among unknown men

In lands beyond the sea;

Nor, England! did I know till then

What love I bore to thee.

'Tis past, that melancholy dream!

Nor will I quit thy shore

A second time; for still I seem

To love thee more and more.

Among thy mountains did I feel

The joy of my desire;

And she I cherished turned her wheel

Beside an English fire.

Thy mornings showed, thy nights concealed, The bowers where Lucy played;

And thine too is the last green field That Lucy's eyes surveyed.

William Wordsworth





I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud

I wandered lonely as a cloud

That floats on high o'er vales and hills, When all at once I saw a crowd,

A host, of golden daffodils;

Beside the lake, beneath the trees,

Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

Continuous as the stars that shine

And twinkle on the milky way,

They stretched in never-ending line

Along the margin of a bay:

Ten thousand saw I at a glance,

Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

The waves beside them danced; but they Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:

A poet could not but be gay,

In such a jocund company:

I gazed---and gazed---but little thought What wealth the show to me had brought: For oft, when on my couch I lie

In vacant or in pensive mood,

They flash upon that inward eye

Which is the bliss of solitude;

And then my heart with pleasure fills, And dances with the daffodils.

William Wordsworth





'I wandered lonely as a cloud...'

I wandered lonely as a cloud

That floats on high o'er vales and hills, When all at once I saw a crowd,

A host, of golden daffodils,

Beside the lake, beneath the trees,

Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

Continuous as the stars that shine

And twinkle on the milky way,

They stretch'd in never-ending line

Along the margin of a bay:

Ten thousand saw I at a glance

Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

The waves beside them danced, but they Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:--

A Poet could not but be gay

In such a jocund company!

I gazed--and gazed--but little thought What wealth the show to me had brought; For oft, when on my couch I lie

In vacant or in pensive mood,

They flash upon that inward eye

Which is the bliss of solitude;

And then my heart with pleasure fills And dances with the daffodils.

William Wordsworth





Idiot Boy, The

'Tis eight o'clock,--a clear March night, The moon is up,--the sky is blue,

The owlet, in the moonlight air,

Shouts from nobody knows where;

He lengthens out his lonely shout,

Halloo! halloo! a long halloo!

--Why bustle thus about your door,

What means this bustle, Betty Foy?

Why are you in this mighty fret?

And why on horseback have you set

Him whom you love, your Idiot Boy?

Scarcely a soul is out of bed;

Good Betty, put him down again;

His lips with joy they burr at you;

But, Betty! what has he to do

With stirrup, saddle, or with rein?

But Betty's bent on her intent;

For her good neighbour, Susan Gale,

Old Susan, she who dwells alone,

Is sick, and makes a piteous moan

As if her very life would fail.

There's not a house within a mile,

No hand to help them in distress;

Old Susan lies a-bed in pain,

And sorely puzzled are the twain,

For what she ails they cannot guess.

And Betty's husband's at the wood,

Where by the week he doth abide,

A woodman in the distant vale;

There's none to help poor Susan Gale; What must be done? what will betide?

And Betty from the lane has fetched

Her Pony, that is mild and good;

Whether he be in joy or pain,

Feeding at will along the lane,

Or bringing faggots from the wood.

And he is all in travelling trim,--

And, by the moonlight, Betty Foy

Has on the well-girt saddle set

(The like was never heard of yet)

Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy.

And he must post without delay

Across the bridge and through the dale, And by the church, and o'er the down,





To bring a Doctor from the town,

Or she will die, old Susan Gale.

There is no need of boot or spur,

There is no need of whip or wand;

For Johnny has his holly-bough,

And with a 'hurly-burly' now

He shakes the green bough in his hand.

And Betty o'er and o'er has told

The Boy, who is her best delight,

Both what to follow, what to shun,

What do, and what to leave undone,

How turn to left, and how to right.

And Betty's most especial charge,

Was, "Johnny! Johnny! mind that you Come home again, nor stop at all,--

Come home again, whate'er befall,

My Johnny, do, I pray you do."

To this did Johnny answer make,

Both with his head and with his hand, And proudly shook the bridle too;

And then! his words were not a few,

Which Betty well could understand.

And now that Johnny is just going,

Though Betty's in a mighty flurry,

She gently pats the Pony's side,

On which her Idiot Boy must ride,

And seems no longer in a hurry.

But when the Pony moved his legs,

Oh! then for the poor Idiot Boy!

For joy he cannot hold the bridle,

For joy his head and heels are idle,

He's idle all for very joy.

And while the Pony moves his legs,

In Johnny's left hand you may see

The green bough motionless and dead:

The Moon that shines above his head

Is not more still and mute than he.

His heart it was so full of glee,

That till full fifty yards were gone, He quite forgot his holly whip,

And all his skill in horsemanship:

Oh! happy, happy, happy John.

And while the Mother, at the door,





Stands fixed, her face with joy o'erflows, Proud of herself, and proud of him,

She sees him in his travelling trim,

How quietly her Johnny goes.

The silence of her Idiot Boy,

What hopes it sends to Betty's heart!

He's at the guide-post--he turns right; She watches till he's out of sight,

And Betty will not then depart.

Burr, burr--now Johnny's lips they burr, As loud as any mill, or near it;

Meek as a lamb the Pony moves,


And Betty listens, glad to hear it.

Away she hies to Susan Gale:

Her Messenger's in merry tune;

The owlets hoot, the owlets curr,

And Johnny's lips they burr, burr, burr, As on he goes beneath the moon.

His steed and he right well agree;

For of this Pony there's a rumour,

That, should he lose his eyes and ears, And should he live a thousand years,

He never will be out of humour.

But then he is a horse that thinks!

And when he thinks, his pace is slack; Now, though he knows poor Johnny well, Yet, for his life, he cannot tell

What he has got upon his back.

So through the moonlight lanes they go, And far into the moonlight dale,

And by the church, and o'er the down, To bring a Doctor from the town,

To comfort poor old Susan Gale.

And Betty, now at Susan's side,

Is in the middle of her story,

What speedy help her Boy will bring,

With many a most diverting thing,

Of Johnny's wit, and Johnny's glory.

And Betty, still at Susan's side,

By this time is not quite so flurried: Demure with porringer and plate

She sits, as if in Susan's fate

Her life and soul were buried.





But Betty, poor good woman! she,

You plainly in her face may read it,

Could lend out of that moment's store Five years of happiness or more

To any that might need it.

But yet I guess that now and then

With Betty all was not so well;

And to the road she turns her ears,

And thence full many a sound she hears, Which she to Susan will not tell.

Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;

"As sure as there's a moon in heaven,"

Cries Betty, "he'll be back again; They'll both be here--'tis almost ten--

Both will be here before eleven."

Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans;

The clock gives warning for eleven;

'Tis on the stroke--"He must be near,"

Quoth Betty, "and will soon be here, As sure as there's a moon in heaven."

The clock is on the stroke of twelve, And Johnny is not yet in sight:

--The Moon's in heaven, as Betty sees, But Betty is not quite at ease;

And Susan has a dreadful night.

And Betty, half an hour ago,

On Johnny vile reflections cast:

"A little idle sauntering Thing!"

With other names, an endless string;

But now that time is gone and past.

And Betty's drooping at the heart,

That happy time all past and gone,

"How can it be he is so late?

The Doctor, he has made him wait;

Susan! they'll both be here anon."

And Susan's growing worse and worse,

And Betty's in a sad 'quandary';

And then there's nobody to say

If she must go, or she must stay!

--She's in a sad 'quandary'.

The clock is on the stroke of one;

But neither Doctor nor his Guide

Appears along the moonlight road;





There's neither horse nor man abroad, And Betty's still at Susan's side.

And Susan now begins to fear

Of sad mischances not a few,

That Johnny may perhaps be drowned;

Or lost, perhaps, and never found;

Which they must both for ever rue.

She prefaced half a hint of this

With, "God forbid it should be true!"

At the first word that Susan said

Cried Betty, rising from the bed,

"Susan, I'd gladly stay with you.

"I must be gone, I must away:

Consider, Johnny's but half-wise;

Susan, we must take care of him,

If he is hurt in life or limb"--

"Oh God forbid!" poor Susan cries.

"What can I do?" says Betty, going,

"What can I do to ease your pain?

Good Susan tell me, and I'll stay;

I fear you're in a dreadful way,

But I shall soon be back again."

"Nay, Betty, go! good Betty, go!

There's nothing that can ease my pain,"

Then off she hies, but with a prayer


Till she comes back again.

So, through the moonlight lane she goes, And far into the moonlight dale;

And how she ran, and how she walked,

And all that to herself she talked,

Would surely be a tedious tale.

In high and low, above, below,

In great and small, in round and square, In tree and tower was Johnny seen,

In bush and brake, in black and green;

'Twas Johnny, Johnny, every where.

And while she crossed the bridge, there came A thought with which her heart is sore--

Johnny perhaps his horse forsook,

To hunt the moon within the brook,

And never will be heard of more.

Now is she high upon the down,





Alone amid a prospect wide;

There's neither Johnny nor his Horse

Among the fern or in the gorse;

There's neither Doctor nor his Guide.

"O saints! what is become of him?

Perhaps he's climbed into an oak,

Where he will stay till he is dead;

Or, sadly he has been misled,

And joined the wandering gipsy-folk.

"Or him that wicked Pony's carried To the dark cave, the goblin's hall;

Or in the castle he's pursuing

Among the ghosts his own undoing;

Or playing with the waterfall."

At poor old Susan then she railed,

While to the town she posts away;

"If Susan had not been so ill,

Alas! I should have had him still,

My Johnny, till my dying day."

Poor Betty, in this sad distemper,

The Doctor's self could hardly spare: Unworthy things she talked, and wild; Even he, of cattle the most mild,

The Pony had his share.

But now she's fairly in the town,

And to the Doctor's door she hies;

'Tis silence all on every side;

The town so long, the town so wide,

Is silent as the skies.

And now she's at the Doctor's door,

She lifts the knocker, rap, rap, rap; The Doctor at the casement shows

His glimmering eyes that peep and doze!

And one hand rubs his old night-cap.

"O Doctor! Doctor! where's my Johnny?"

"I'm here, what is't you want with me?"

"O Sir! you know I'm Betty Foy,

And I have lost my poor dear Boy,

You know him--him you often see;

"He's not so wise as some folks be:"

"The devil take his wisdom!" said The Doctor, looking somewhat grim,

"What, Woman! should I know of him?"

And, grumbling, he went back to bed!





"O woe is me! O woe is me!

Here will I die, here will I die;

I thought to find my lost one here,

But he is neither far nor near,

Oh! what a wretched Mother I!"

She stops, she stands, she looks about; Which way to turn she cannot tell.

Poor Betty! it would ease her pain

If she had heart to knock again;

--The clock strikes three--a dismal knell!

Then up along the town she hies,

No wonder if her senses fail;

This piteous news so much it shocked her, She quite forgot to send the Doctor,

To comfort poor old Susan Gale.

And now she's high upon the down,

And she can see a mile of road:

"O cruel! I'm almost threescore; Such night as this was ne'er before,

There's not a single soul abroad."

She listens, but she cannot hear

The foot of horse, the voice of man;

The streams with softest sound are flowing, The grass you almost hear it growing, You hear it now, if e'er you can.

The owlets through the long blue night Are shouting to each other still:

Fond lovers! yet not quite hob nob,

They lengthen out the tremulous sob,

That echoes far from hill to hill.

Poor Betty now has lost all hope,

Her thoughts are bent on deadly sin,

A green-grown pond she just has past, And from the brink she hurries fast,

Lest she should drown herself therein.

And now she sits her down and weeps;

Such tears she never shed before;

"Oh dear, dear Pony! my sweet joy!


And we will ne'er o'erload thee more."

A thought is come into her head:

The Pony he is mild and good,

And we have always used him well;





Perhaps he's gone along the dell,

And carried Johnny to the wood.

Then up she springs as if on wings;

She thinks no more of deadly sin;

If Betty fifty ponds should see,

The last of all her thoughts would be To drown herself therein.

O Reader! now that I might tell

What Johnny and his Horse are doing

What they've been doing all this time, Oh could I put it into rhyme,

A most delightful tale pursuing!

Perhaps, and no unlikely thought!

He with his Pony now doth roam

The cliffs and peaks so high that are, To lay his hands upon a star,

And in his pocket bring it home.

Perhaps he's turned himself about,

His face unto his horse's tail,

And, still and mute, in wonder lost,

All silent as a horseman-ghost,

He travels slowly down the vale.

And now, perhaps, is hunting sheep,

A fierce and dreadful hunter he;

Yon valley, now so trim and green,

In five months' time, should he be seen, A desert wilderness will be!

Perhaps, with head and heels on fire, And like the very soul of evil,

He's galloping away, away,

And so will gallop on for aye,

The bane of all that dread the devil!

I to the Muses have been bound

These fourteen years, by strong indentures: O gentle Muses! let me tell

But half of what to him befell;

He surely met with strange adventures.

O gentle Muses! is this kind?

Why will ye thus my suit repel?

Why of your further aid bereave me?

And can ye thus unfriended leave me

Ye Muses! whom I love so well?

Who's yon, that, near the waterfall,





Which thunders down with headlong force, Beneath the moon, yet shining fair,

As careless as if nothing were,

Sits upright on a feeding horse?

Unto his horse--there feeding free,

He seems, I think, the rein to give;

Of moon or stars he takes no heed;

Of such we in romances read:

--'Tis Johnny! Johnny! as I live.

And that's the very Pony, too!

Where is she, where is Betty Foy?

She hardly can sustain her fears;

The roaring waterfall she hears,

And cannot find her Idiot Boy.

Your Pony's worth his weight in gold: Then calm your terrors, Betty Foy!

She's coming from among the trees,

And now all full in view she sees

Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy.

And Betty sees the Pony too:

Why stand you thus, good Betty Foy?

It is no goblin, 'tis no ghost,

'Tis he whom you so long have lost,

He whom you love, your Idiot Boy.

She looks again--her arms are up--

She screams--she cannot move for joy; She darts, as with a torrent's force, She almost has o'erturned the Horse,

And fast she holds her Idiot Boy.

And Johnny burrs, and laughs aloud;

Whether in cunning or in joy

I cannot tell; but while he laughs,

Betty a drunken pleasure quaffs

To hear again her Idiot Boy.

And now she's at the Pony's tail,

And now is at the Pony's head,--

On that side now, and now on this;

And, almost stifled with her bliss,

A few sad tears does Betty shed.

She kisses o'er and o'er again

Him whom she loves, her Idiot Boy;

She's happy here, is happy there,

She is uneasy every where;

Her limbs are all alive with joy.





She pats the Pony, where or when

She knows not, happy Betty Foy!

The little Pony glad may be,

But he is milder far than she,

You hardly can perceive his joy.

"Oh! Johnny, never mind the Doctor; You've done your best, and that is all:"


From the loud waterfall.

By this the stars were almost gone,

The moon was setting on the hill,

So pale you scarcely looked at her:

The little birds began to stir,

Though yet their tongues were still.

The Pony, Betty, and her Boy,

Wind slowly through the woody dale;

And who is she, betimes abroad,

That hobbles up the steep rough road?

Who is it, but old Susan Gale?

Long time lay Susan lost in thought;

And many dreadful fears beset her,

Both for her Messenger and Nurse;

And, as her mind grew worse and worse, Her body--it grew better.

She turned, she tossed herself in bed, On all sides doubts and terrors met her; Point after point did she discuss;

And, while her mind was fighting thus, Her body still grew better.

"Alas! what is become of them?

These fears can never be endured;

I'll to the wood."--The word scarce said, Did Susan rise up from her bed,

As if by magic cured.

Away she goes up hill and down,

And to the wood at length is come;

She spies her Friends, she shouts a greeting; Oh me! it is a merry meeting

As ever was in Christendom.

The owls have hardly sung their last, While our four travellers homeward wend; The owls have hooted all night long,





And with the owls began my song,

And with the owls must end.

For while they all were travelling home, Cried Betty, "Tell us, Johnny, do, Where all this long night you have been, What you have heard, what you have seen: And, Johnny, mind you tell us true."

Now Johnny all night long had heard

The owls in tuneful concert strive;

No doubt too he the moon had seen;

For in the moonlight he had been

From eight o'clock till five.

And thus, to Betty's question, he

Made answer, like a traveller bold,

(His very words I give to you,)

"The cocks did crow to-whoo, to-whoo, And the sun did shine so cold!"

--Thus answered Johnny in his glory,

And that was all his travel's story,

William Wordsworth





Idle Shepherd Boys, The

The valley rings with mirth and joy;

Among the hills the echoes play

A never never ending song,

To welcome in the May.

The magpie chatters with delight;

The mountain raven's youngling brood

Have left the mother and the nest;

And they go rambling east and west

In search of their own food;

Or through the glittering vapors dart In very wantonness of heart.

Beneath a rock, upon the grass,

Two boys are sitting in the sun;

Their work, if any work they have,

Is out of mind---or done.

On pipes of sycamore they play

The fragments of a Christmas hymn;

Or with that plant which in our dale

We call stag-horn, or fox's tail,

Their rusty hats they trim:

And thus, as happy as the day,

Those Shepherds wear the time away.

Along the river's stony marge

The sand-lark chants a joyous song;

The thrush is busy in the wood,

And carols loud and strong.

A thousand lambs are on the rocks,

All newly born! both earth and sky

Keep jubilee, and more than all,

Those boys with their green coronal;

They never hear the cry,

That plaintive cry! which up the hill Comes from the depth of Dungeon-Ghyll.

Said Walter, leaping from the ground,

"Down to the stump of yon old yew We'll for our whistles run a race."

Away the shepherds flew;

They leapt---they ran---and when they came Right opposite to Dungeon-Ghyll,

Seeing that he should lose the prize,

"Stop! " to his comrade Walter cries---

James stopped with no good will:

Said Walter then, exulting; "Here You'll find a task for half a year.

Cross, if you dare, where I shall cross---

Come on, and tread where I shall tread."

The other took him at his word,

And followed as he led.





It was a spot which you may see

If ever you to Langdale go;

Into a chasm a mighty block

Hath fallen, and made a bridge of rock: The gulf is deep below;

And, in a basin black and small,

Receives a lofty waterfall.

With staff in hand across the cleft

The challenger pursued his march;

And now, all eyes and feet, hath gained The middle of the arch.

When list! he hears a piteous moan---

Again !---his heart within him dies---

His pulse is stopped, his breath is lost, He totters, pallid as a ghost,

And, looking down, espies

A lamb, that in the pool is pent

Within that black and frightful rent.

The lamb had slipped into the stream, And safe without a bruise or wound

The cataract had borne him down

Into the gulf profound.

His dam had seen him when he fell,

She saw him down the torrent borne;

And, while with all a mother's love

She from the lofty rocks above

Sent forth a cry forlorn,

The lamb, still swimming round and round, Made answer to that plaintive sound.

When he had learnt what thing it was, That sent this rueful cry; I ween

The Boy recovered heart, and told

The sight which he had seen.

Both gladly now deferred their task;

Nor was there wanting other aid---

A Poet, one who loves the brooks

Far better than the sages' books,

By chance had thither strayed;

And there the helpless lamb he found

By those huge rocks encompassed round.

He drew it from the troubled pool,

And brought it forth into the light:

The Shepherds met him with his charge, An unexpected sight!

Into their arms the lamb they took,

Whose life and limbs the flood had spared; Then up the steep ascent they hied,

And placed him at his mother's side;





And gently did the Bard

Those idle Shepherd-Boys upbraid,

And bade them better mind their trade.

William Wordsworth





Influence of Natural Objects

Wisdom and Spirit of the universe!

Thou Soul, that art the Eternity of thought!

And giv'st to forms and images a breath And everlasting motion! not in vain,

By day or star-light, thus from my first dawn Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me The passions that build up our human soul; Not with the mean and vulgar works of Man; But with high objects, with enduring things, With life and nature; purifying thus

The elements of feeling and of thought, And sanctifying by such discipline

Both pain and fear,--until we recognise A grandeur in the beatings of the heart.

Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me With stinted kindness. In November days, When vapours rolling down the valleys made A lonely scene more lonesome; among woods At noon; and 'mid the calm of summer nights, When, by the margin of the trembling lake, Beneath the gloomy hills, homeward I went In solitude, such intercourse was mine: Mine was it in the fields both day and night, And by the waters, all the summer long.

And in the frosty season, when the sun Was set, and, visible for many a mile, The cottage-windows through the twilight blazed, I heeded not the summons: happy time

It was indeed for all of us; for me

It was a time of rapture! Clear and loud The village-clock tolled six--I wheeled about, Proud and exulting like an untired horse That cares not for his home.--All shod with steel We hissed along the polished ice, in games Confederate, imitative of the chase

And woodland pleasures,--the resounding horn, The pack loud-chiming, and the hunted hare.

So through the darkness and the cold we flew, And not a voice was idle: with the din Smitten, the precipices rang aloud;

The leafless trees and every icy crag Tinkled like iron; while far-distant hills Into the tumult sent an alien sound

Of melancholy, not unnoticed while the stars, Eastward, were sparkling clear, and in the west The orange sky of evening died away.

Not seldom from the uproar I retired

Into a silent bay, or sportively

Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng, To cut across the reflex of a star;

Image, that, flying still before me, gleamed Upon the glassy plain: and oftentimes,





When we had given our bodies to the wind, And all the shadowy banks on either side Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still The rapid line of motion, then at once Have I, reclining back upon my heels, Stopped short; yet still the solitary cliffs Wheeled by me--even as if the earth had rolled With visible motion her diurnal round!

Behind me did they stretch in solemn train, Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched Till all was tranquil as a summer sea.

William Wordsworth





Inscriptions Written with a Slate Pencil upon a Stone THE LARGEST OF A HEAP LYING NEAR A DESERTED QUARRY, UPON ONE OF THE

ISLANDS AT RYDAL

Stranger! this hillock of mis-shapen stones Is not a Ruin spared or made by time, Nor, as perchance thou rashly deem'st, the Cairn Of some old British Chief: 'tis nothing more Than the rude embryo of a little Dome Or Pleasure-house, once destined to be built Among the birch-trees of this rocky isle.

But, as it chanced, Sir William having learned That from the shore a full-grown man might wade, And make himself a freeman of this spot At any hour he chose, the prudent Knight Desisted, and the quarry and the mound Are monuments of his unfinished task.

The block on which these lines are traced, perhaps, Was once selected as the corner-stone Of that intended Pile, which would have been Some quaint odd plaything of elaborate skill, So that, I guess, the linnet and the thrush, And other little builders who dwell here, Had wondered at the work. But blame him not, For old Sir William was a gentle Knight, Bled in this vale, to which he appertained With all his ancestry. Then peace to him, And for the outrage which he had devised Entire forgiveness!--But if thou art one On fire with thy impatience to become An inmate of these mountains,--if, disturbed By beautiful conceptions, thou hast hewn Out of the quiet rock the elements

Of thy trim Mansion destined soon to blaze In snow-white splendour,--think again; and, taught By old Sir William and his quarry, leave Thy fragments to the bramble and the rose; There let the vernal slow-worm sun himself, And let the redbreast hop from stone to stone.

William Wordsworth





Inside of King's College Chapel, Cambridge

. Tax not the royal Saint with vain expense, With ill-matched aims the Architect who planned--

Albeit labouring for a scanty band

Of white-robed Scholars only--this immense And glorious Work of fine intelligence!

Give all thou canst; high Heaven rejects the lore Of nicely-calculated less or more;

So deemed the man who fashioned for the sense These lofty pillars, spread that branching roof Self-poised, and scooped into ten thousand cells, Where light and shade repose, where music dwells Lingering--and wandering on as loth to die; Like thoughts whose very sweetness yieldeth proof That they were born for immortality.

William Wordsworth





It Is a Beauteous Evening

It is a beauteous evening, calm and free, The holy time is quiet as a nun

Breathless with adoration; the broad sun Is sinking down in its tranquility;

The gentleness of heaven broods o'er the sea: Listen! the mighty Being is awake,

And doth with his eternal motion make A sound like thunder - everlastingly.

Dear Child! dear Girl! that walkest with me here, If thou appear untouched by solemn thought, Thy nature is not therefore less divine: Thou liest in Abraham's bosom all the year, And worship'st at the Temple's inner shrine, God being with thee when we know it not.

William Wordsworth





It is not to be Thought of

. It is not to be thought of that the Flood Of British freedom, which, to the open sea Of the world's praise, from dark antiquity Hath flowed, "with pomp of waters, unwithstood,"

Roused though it be full often to a mood Which spurns the check of salutary bands, That this most famous Stream in bogs and sands Should perish; and to evil and to good Be lost for ever. In our halls is hung Armoury of the invincible Knights of old: We must be free or die, who speak the tongue That Shakespeare spake; the faith and morals hold Which Milton held.--In every thing we are sprung Of Earth's first blood, have titles manifold.

William Wordsworth





It was an April morning: fresh and clear It was an April morning: fresh and clear The Rivulet, delighting in its strength, Ran with a young man's speed; and yet the voice Of waters which the winter had supplied Was softened down into a vernal tone.

The spirit of enjoyment and desire,

And hopes and wishes, from all living things Went circling, like a multitude of sounds.

The budding groves seemed eager to urge on The steps of June; as if their various hues Were only hindrances that stood between Them and their object: but, meanwhile, prevailed Such an entire contentment in the air That every naked ash, and tardy tree

Yet leafless, showed as if the countenance With which it looked on this delightful day Were native to the summer.--Up the brook I roamed in the confusion of my heart, Alive to all things and forgetting all.

At length I to a sudden turning came

In this continuous glen, where down a rock The Stream, so ardent in its course before, Sent forth such sallies of glad sound, that all Which I till then had heard, appeared the voice Of common pleasure: beast and bird, the lamb, The shepherd's dog, the linnet and the thrush Vied with this waterfall, and made a song, Which, while I listened, seemed like the wild growth Or like some natural produce of the air, That could not cease to be. Green leaves were here; But 'twas the foliage of the rocks--the birch, The yew, the holly, and the bright green thorn, With hanging islands of resplendent furze: And, on a summit, distant a short space, By any who should look beyond the dell, A single mountain-cottage might be seen.

I gazed and gazed, and to myself I said,

"Our thoughts at least are ours; and this wild nook, My EMMA, I will dedicate to thee."

----Soon did the spot become my other home, My dwelling, and my out-of-doors abode.

And, of the Shepherds who have seen me there, To whom I sometimes in our idle talk

Have told this fancy, two or three, perhaps, Years after we are gone and in our graves, When they have cause to speak of this wild place, May call it by the name of EMMA'S DELL.

William Wordsworth





Kitten And Falling Leaves, The

That way look, my Infant, lo!

What a pretty baby-show!

See the kitten on the wall,

Sporting with the leaves that fall,

Withered leaves---one---two---and three---

From the lofty elder-tree!

Through the calm and frosty air

Of this morning bright and fair,

Eddying round and round they sink

Softly, slowly: one might think,

From the motions that are made,

Every little leaf conveyed

Sylph or Faery hither tending,---

To this lower world descending,

Each invisible and mute,

In his wavering parachute.

---But the Kitten, how she starts,

Crouches, stretches, paws, and darts!

First at one, and then its fellow

Just as light and just as yellow;

There are many now---now one---

Now they stop and there are none

What intenseness of desire

In her upward eye of fire!

With a tiger-leap half way

Now she meets the coming prey,

Lets it go as fast, and then

Has it in her power again:

Now she works with three or four,

Like an Indian conjurer;

Quick as he in feats of art,

Far beyond in joy of heart.

Were her antics played in the eye

Of a thousand standers-by,

Clapping hands with shout and stare,

What would little Tabby care

For the plaudits of the crowd?

Over happy to be proud,

Over wealthy in the treasure

Of her own exceeding pleasure!

'Tis a pretty baby-treat;

Nor, I deem, for me unmeet;

Here, for neither Babe nor me,

Other play-mate can I see.

Of the countless living things,

That with stir of feet and wings

(In the sun or under shade,

Upon bough or grassy blade)

And with busy revellings,

Chirp and song, and murmurings,

Made this orchard's narrow space,

And this vale so blithe a place;





Multitudes are swept away

Never more to breathe the day:

Some are sleeping; some in bands

Travelled into distant lands;

Others slunk to moor and wood,

Far from human neighborhood;

And, among the Kinds that keep

With us closer fellowship,

With us openly abide,

All have laid their mirth aside.

Where is he that giddy Sprite,

Blue-cap, with his colors bright,

Who was blest as bird could be,

Feeding in the apple-tree;

Made such wanton spoil and rout,

Turning blossoms inside out;

Hung---head pointing towards the ground---

Fluttered, perched, into a round

Bound himself, and then unbound;

Lithest, gaudiest Harlequin!

Prettiest Tumbler ever seen!

Light of heart and light of limb;

What is now become of Him?

Lambs, that through the mountains went Frisking, bleating merriment,

When the year was in its prime,

They are sobered by this time.

If you look to vale or hill,

If you listen, all is still,

Save a little neighboring rill,

That from out the rocky ground

Strikes a solitary sound.

Vainly glitter hill and plain,

And the air is calm in vain;

Vainly Morning spreads the lure

Of a sky serene and pure;

Creature none can she decoy

Into open sign of joy:

Is it that they have a fear

Of the dreary season near?

Or that other pleasures be

Sweeter even than gaiety ?

Yet, whate'er enjoyments dwell

In the impenetrable cell

Of the silent heart which Nature

Furnishes to every creature;

Whatsoe'er we feel and know

Too sedate for outward show,

Such a light of gladness breaks,

Pretty Kitten! from thy freaks,---

Spreads with such a living grace

O'er my little Dora's face;





Yes, the sight so stirs and charms

Thee, Baby, laughing in my arms,

That almost I could repine

That your transports are not mine,

That I do not wholly fare

Even as ye do, thoughtless pair!

And I will have my careless season

Spite of melancholy reason,

Will walk through life in such a way

That, when time brings on decay,

Now and then I may possess

Hours of perfect gladsomeness.

---Pleased by any random toy;

By a kitten's busy joy,

Or an infant's laughing eye

Sharing in the ecstasy;

I would fare like that or this,

Find my wisdom in my bliss;

Keep the sprightly soul awake,

And have faculties to take,

Even from things by sorrow wrought,

Matter for a jocund thought,

Spite of care, and spite of grief,

To gambol with Life's falling Leaf.

William Wordsworth





Lament Of Mary Queen Of Scots

SMILE of the Moon!---for I so name

That silent greeting from above;

A gentle flash of light that came

From her whom drooping captives love; Or art thou of still higher birth?

Thou that didst part the clouds of earth, My torpor to reprove!

Bright boon of pitying Heaven!---alas, I may not trust thy placid cheer!

Pondering that Time tonight will pass The threshold of another year;

For years to me are sad and dull;

My very moments are too full

Of hopelessness and fear.

And yet, the soul-awakening gleam,

That struck perchance the farthest cone Of Scotland's rocky wilds, did seem

To visit me, and me alone;

Me, unapproached by any friend,

Save those who to my sorrow lend

Tears due unto their own.

To night the church-tower bells will ring Through these wide realms a festire peal; To the new year a welcoming;

A tuneful offering for the weal

Of happy millions lulled in deep;

While I am forced to watch and weep,

By wounds that may not heal.

Born all too high, by wedlock raised

Still higherÑto be cast thus low!

Would that mine eyes had never gazed

On aught of more ambitious show

Than the sweet flowerets of the fields

---It is my royal state that yields

This bitterness of woe.

Yet how?---for I, if there be truth

In the world's voice, was passing fair; And beauty, for confiding youth,

Those shocks of passion can prepare

That kill the bloom before its time;

And blanch, without the owner's crime, The most resplendent hair.

Unblest distinction! showered on me

To bind a lingering life in chains:

All that could quit my grasp, or flee, Is gone;---but not the subtle stains





Fixed in the spirit; for even here

Can I be proud that jealous fear

Of what I was remains.

A Woman rules my prison's key;

A sister Queen, against the bent

O£ law and holiest sympathy,

Detains me, doubtful of the event;

Great God, who feel'st for my distress, My thoughts are all that I possess,

O keep them innocent!

Farewell desire of human aid,

Which abject mortals vainly court!

By friends deceived, by foes betrayed, Of fears the prey, of hopes the sport; Nought but the world-redeeming Cross

Is able to support my loss,

My burthen to support.

Hark! the death-note of the year

Sounded by the castle-clock!

From her sunk eyes a stagnant tear

Stole forth, unsettled by the shock;

But oft the woods renewed their green, Ere the tired head of Scotland's Queen Reposed upon the block!

William Wordsworth





Lament of Mary Queen of Scots, on The Eve of a New Year Smile of the Moon!---for I so name

That silent greeting from above;

A gentle flash of light that came

From her whom drooping captives love; Or art thou of still higher birth?

Thou that didst part the clouds of earth, My torpor to reprove!

Bright boon of pitying Heaven!---alas, I may not trust thy placid cheer!

Pondering that Time tonight will pass The threshold of another year;

For years to me are sad and dull;

My very moments are too full

Of hopelessness and fear.

And yet, the soul-awakening gleam,

That struck perchance the farthest cone Of Scotland's rocky wilds, did seem

To visit me, and me alone;

Me, unapproached by any friend,

Save those who to my sorrow lend

Tears due unto their own.

To night the church-tower bells will ring Through these wide realms a festire peal; To the new year a welcoming;

A tuneful offering for the weal

Of happy millions lulled in deep;

While I am forced to watch and weep,

By wounds that may not heal.

Born all too high, by wedlock raised

Still higherÑto be cast thus low!

Would that mine eyes had never gazed

On aught of more ambitious show

Than the sweet flowerets of the fields

---It is my royal state that yields

This bitterness of woe.

Yet how?---for I, if there be truth

In the world's voice, was passing fair; And beauty, for confiding youth,

Those shocks of passion can prepare

That kill the bloom before its time;

And blanch, without the owner's crime, The most resplendent hair.

Unblest distinction! showered on me

To bind a lingering life in chains:

All that could quit my grasp, or flee, Is gone;---but not the subtle stains





Fixed in the spirit; for even here

Can I be proud that jealous fear

Of what I was remains.

A Woman rules my prison's key;

A sister Queen, against the bent

O£ law and holiest sympathy,

Detains me, doubtful of the event;

Great God, who feel'st for my distress, My thoughts are all that I possess,

O keep them innocent!

Farewell desire of human aid,

Which abject mortals vainly court!

By friends deceived, by foes betrayed, Of fears the prey, of hopes the sport; Nought but the world-redeeming Cross

Is able to support my loss,

My burthen to support.

Hark! the death-note of the year

Sounded by the castle-clock!

From her sunk eyes a stagnant tear

Stole forth, unsettled by the shock;

But oft the woods renewed their green, Ere the tired head of Scotland's Queen Reposed upon the block!

William Wordsworth





Laodamia

. "With sacrifice before the rising morn Vows have I made by fruitless hope inspired; And from the infernal Gods, 'mid shades forlorn Of night, my slaughtered Lord have I required: Celestial pity I again implore;--

Restore him to my sight--great Jove, restore!"

So speaking, and by fervent love endowed With faith, the Suppliant heavenward lifts her hands; While, like the sun emerging from a cloud, Her countenance brightens--and her eye expands; Her bosom heaves and spreads, her stature grows; As she expects the issue in repose.

O terror! what hath she perceived?--O joy!

What doth she look on?--whom doth she behold?

Her Hero slain upon the beach of Troy?

His vital presence? his corporeal mould?

It is--if sense deceive her not--'tis He!

And a God leads him, wingèd Mercury!

Mild Hermes spake--and touched her with his wand That calms all fear; "Such grace hath crowned thy prayer, Laodamía! that at Jove's command

Thy husband walks the paths of upper air: He comes to tarry with thee three hours' space; Accept the gift, behold him face to face!"

Forth sprang the impassioned Queen her Lord to clasp; Again that consummation she essayed;

But unsubstantial Form eludes her grasp As often as that eager grasp was made.

The Phantom parts--but parts to re-unite, And re-assume his place before her sight.

"Protesiláus, lo! thy guide is gone!

Confirm, I pray, the vision with thy voice: This is our palace,--yonder is thy throne; Speak, and the floor thou tread'st on will rejoice.

Not to appal me have the gods bestowed This precious boon; and blest a sad abode."

"Great Jove, Laodamía! doth not leave His gifts imperfect:--Spectre though I be, I am not sent to scare thee or deceive; But in reward of thy fidelity.

And something also did my worth obtain; For fearless virtue bringeth boundless gain.

"Thou knowest, the Delphic oracle foretold That the first Greek who touched the Trojan strand Should die; but me the threat could not withhold: A generous cause a victim did demand;





And forth I leapt upon the sandy plain; A self-devoted chief--by Hector slain."

"Supreme of Heroes--bravest, noblest, best!

Thy matchless courage I bewail no more, Which then, when tens of thousands were deprest By doubt, propelled thee to the fatal shore; Thou found'st--and I forgive thee--here thou art--

A nobler counsellor than my poor heart.

"But thou, though capable of sternest deed, Wert kind as resolute, and good as brave; And he, whose power restores thee, hath decreed Thou should'st elude the malice of the grave: Redundant are thy locks, thy lips as fair As when their breath enriched Thessalian air.

"No spectre greets me,--no vain Shadow this; Come, blooming Hero, place thee by my side!

Give, on this well-known couch, one nuptial kiss To me, this day a second time thy bride!"

Jove frowned in heaven: the conscious Parcæ threw Upon those roseate lips a Stygian hue.

"This visage tells thee that my doom is past: Nor should the change be mourned, even if the joys Of sense were able to return as fast

And surely as they vanish. Earth destroys Those raptures duly---Erebus disdains: Calm pleasures there abide--majestic pains.

"Be taught, O faithful Consort, to control Rebellious passion: for the Gods approve The depth, and not the tumult, of the soul; A fervent, not ungovernable love.

Thy transports moderate; and meekly mourn When I depart, for brief is my sojourn--"

"Ah wherefore?--Did not Hercules by force Wrest from the guardian monster of the tomb Alcestis, a reanimated corse,

Given back to dwell on earth in vernal bloom?

Medea's spells dispersed the weight of years, And Æson stood a youth 'mid youthful peers.

"The Gods to us are merciful--and they Yet further may relent: for mightier far Than strength of nerve and sinew, or the sway Of magic potent over sun and star,

Is love, though oft to agony distrest, And though his favourite seat be feeble woman's breast.





"But if thou goest, I follow--" "Peace!" he said,--

She looked upon him and was calmed and cheered; The ghastly colour from his lips had fled; In his deportment, shape, and mien, appeared Elysian beauty, melancholy grace,

Brought from a pensive though a happy place.

He spake of love, such love as Spirits feel In worlds whose course is equable and pure; No fears to beat away--no strife to heal--

The past unsighed for, and the future sure; Spake of heroic arts in graver mood

Revived, with finer harmony pursued;

Of all that is most beauteous--imaged there In happier beauty; more pellucid streams, An ampler ether, a diviner air,

And fields invested with purpureal gleams; Climes which the sun, who sheds the brightest day Earth knows, is all unworthy to survey.

Yet there the Soul shall enter which hath earned That privilege by virtue.--"Ill," said he,

"The end of man's existence I discerned, Who from ignoble games and revelry

Could draw, when we had parted, vain delight, While tears were thy best pastime, day and night;

"And while my youthful peers before my eyes (Each hero following his peculiar bent) Prepared themselves for glorious enterprise By martial sports,--or, seated in the tent, Chieftains and kings in council were detained; What time the fleet at Aulis lay enchained.

"The wished-for wind was given:--I then revolved The oracle, upon the silent sea;

And, if no worthier led the way, resolved That, of a thousand vessels, mine should be The foremost prow in pressing to the strand,--

Mine the first blood that tinged the Trojan sand.

"Yet bitter, oft-times bitter, was the pang When of thy loss I thought, belovèd Wife!

On thee too fondly did my memory hang, And on the joys we shared in mortal life,--

The paths which we had trod--these fountains, flowers:





My new-planned cities, and unfinished towers.

"But should suspense permit the Foe to cry,

'Behold they tremble!--haughty their array, Yet of their numbers no one dares to die?'

In soul I swept the indignity away:

Old frailties then recurred:--but lofty thought, In act embodied, my deliverance wrought.

"And Thou, though strong in love, art all too weak In reason, in self-government too slow; I counsel thee by fortitude to seek

Our blest re-union in the shades below.

The invisible world with thee hath sympathised; Be thy affections raised and solemnised.

"Learn, by a mortal yearning, to ascend--

Seeking a higher object. Love was given, Encouraged, sanctioned, chiefly for that end; For this the passion to excess was driven--

That self might be annulled: her bondage prove The fetters of a dream opposed to love.--

Aloud she shrieked! for Hermes re-appears!

Round the dear Shade she would have clung--'tis vain: The hours are past--too brief had they been years; And him no mortal effort can detain:

Swift, toward the realms that know not earthly day, He through the portal takes his silent way, And on the palace-floor a lifeless corse She lay.

Thus, all in vain exhorted and reproved, She perished; and, as for a wilful crime, By the just Gods whom no weak pity moved, Was doomed to wear out her appointed time, Apart from happy Ghosts, that gather flowers Of blissful quiet 'mid unfading bowers.

--Yet tears to human suffering are due; And mortal hopes defeated and o'erthrown Are mourned by man, and not by man alone, As fondly he believes.--Upon the side Of Hellespont (such faith was entertained) A knot of spiry trees for ages grew

From out the tomb of him for whom she died; And ever, when such stature they had gained





That Ilium's walls were subject to their view, The trees' tall summits withered at the sight; A constant interchange of growth and blight!

William Wordsworth





Last of The Flock, The

I

In distant countries have I been,

And yet I have not often seen

A healthy man, a man full grown,

Weep in the public roads, alone.

But such a one, on English ground,

And in the broad highway, I met;

Along the broad highway he came,

His cheeks with tears were wet:

Sturdy he seemed, though he was sad;

And in his arms a Lamb he had.

II

He saw me, and he turned aside,

As if he wished himself to hide:

And with his coat did then essay

To wipe those briny tears away.

I followed him, and said, "My friend, What ails you? wherefore weep you so?"

--"Shame on me, Sir! this lusty Lamb, He makes my tears to flow.

To-day I fetched him from the rock;

He is the last of all my flock,

III

"When I was young, a single man, And after youthful follies ran,

Though little given to care and thought, Yet, so it was, an ewe I bought;

And other sheep from her I raised,

As healthy sheep as you might see;

And then I married, and was rich

As I could wish to be;

Of sheep I numbered a full score,

And every year increased my store.

IV

"Year after year my stock it grew; And from this one, this single ewe,

Full fifty comely sheep I raised,

As fine a flock as ever grazed!

Upon the Quantock hills they fed;

They throve, and we at home did thrive:

--This lusty Lamb of all my store

Is all that is alive;

And now I care not if we die,

And perish all of poverty.





V

"Six Children, Sir! had I to feed; Hard labour in a time of need!

My pride was tamed, and in our grief

I of the Parish asked relief.

They said, I was a wealthy man;

My sheep upon the uplands fed,

And it was fit that thence I took

Whereof to buy us bread.

'Do this: how can we give to you,'

They cried, 'what to the poor is due?'

VI

"I sold a sheep, as they had said, And bought my little children bread,

And they were healthy with their food For me--it never did me good.

A woeful time it was for me,

To see the end of all my gains,

The pretty flock which I had reared

With all my care and pains,

To see it melt like snow away--

For me it was a woeful day.

VII

"Another still! and still another!

A little lamb, and then its mother!

It was a vein that never stopped--

Like blood-drops from my heart they dropped.

'Till thirty were not left alive

They dwindled, dwindled, one by one

And I may say, that many a time

I wished they all were gone--

Reckless of what might come at last

Were but the bitter struggle past.

VIII

"To wicked deeds I was inclined, And wicked fancies crossed my mind;

And every man I chanced to see,

I thought he knew some ill of me:

No peace, no comfort could I find,

No ease, within doors or without;

And, crazily and wearily

I went my work about;

And oft was moved to flee from home,

And hide my head where wild beasts roam.





IX

"Sir! 'twas a precious flock to me, As dear as my own children be;

For daily with my growing store

I loved my children more and more.

Alas! it was an evil time;

God cursed me in my sore distress;

I prayed, yet every day I thought

I loved my children less;

And every week, and every day,

My flock it seemed to melt away.

X

"They dwindled, Sir, sad sight to see!

From ten to five, from five to three, A lamb, a wether, and a ewe;--

And then at last from three to two;

And, of my fifty, yesterday

I had but only one:

And here it lies upon my arm,

Alas! and I have none;--

To-day I fetched it from the rock;

It is the last of all my flock."

William Wordsworth





Lines composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey Five years have past; five summers, with the length Of five long winters! and again I hear These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs With a soft inland murmur.--Once again Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs, That on a wild secluded scene impress Thoughts of more deep seclusion; and connect The landscape with the quiet of the sky.

The day is come when I again repose

Here, under this dark sycamore, and view These plots of cottage-ground, these orchard-tufts, Which at this season, with their unripe fruits, Are clad in one green hue, and lose themselves

'Mid groves and copses. Once again I see These hedge-rows, hardly hedge-rows, little lines Of sportive wood run wild: these pastoral farms, Green to the very door; and wreaths of smoke Sent up, in silence, from among the trees!

With some uncertain notice, as might seem Of vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods, Or of some Hermit's cave, where by his fire The Hermit sits alone.

These beauteous forms,

Through a long absence, have not been to me As is a landscape to a blind man's eye: But oft, in lonely rooms, and 'mid the din Of towns and cities, I have owed to them In hours of weariness, sensations sweet, Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart; And passing even into my purer mind,

With tranquil restoration:--feelings too Of unremembered pleasure: such, perhaps, As have no slight or trivial influence On that best portion of a good man's life, His little, nameless, unremembered, acts Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust, To them I may have owed another gift, Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood, In which the burthen of the mystery,

In which the heavy and the weary weight Of all this unintelligible world,

Is lightened:--that serene and blessed mood, In which the affections gently lead us on,--

Until, the breath of this corporeal frame And even the motion of our human blood Almost suspended, we are laid asleep

In body, and become a living soul:

While with an eye made quiet by the power Of harmony, and the deep power of joy, We see into the life of things.

If this

Be but a vain belief, yet, oh! how oft--





In darkness and amid the many shapes

Of joyless daylight; when the fretful stir Unprofitable, and the fever of the world, Have hung upon the beatings of my heart--

How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee, O sylvan Wye! thou wanderer thro' the woods, How often has my spirit turned to thee!

And now, with gleams of half-extinguished thought, With many recognitions dim and faint, And somewhat of a sad perplexity,

The picture of the mind revives again: While here I stand, not only with the sense Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts That in this moment there is life and food For future years. And so I dare to hope, Though changed, no doubt, from what I was when first I came among these hills; when like a roe I bounded o'er the mountains, by the sides Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams, Wherever nature led: more like a man

Flying from something that he dreads, than one Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then (The coarser pleasures of my boyish days, And their glad animal movements all gone by) To me was all in all.--I cannot paint What then I was. The sounding cataract Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock, The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, Their colours and their forms, were then to me An appetite; a feeling and a love,

That had no need of a remoter charm,

By thought supplied, nor any interest Unborrowed from the eye.--That time is past, And all its aching joys are now no more, And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur, other gifts Have followed; for such loss, I would believe, Abundant recompence. For I have learned To look on nature, not as in the hour Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes The still, sad music of humanity,


All thinking things, all objects of all thought, And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still





A lover of the meadows and the woods, And mountains; and of all that we behold From this green earth; of all the mighty world Of eye, and ear,--both what they half create, And what perceive; well pleased to recognise In nature and the language of the sense, The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse, The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul Of all my moral being.

Nor perchance,

If I were not thus taught, should I the more Suffer my genial spirits to decay:

For thou art with me here upon the banks Of this fair river; thou my dearest Friend, My dear, dear Friend; and in thy voice I catch The language of my former heart, and read My former pleasures in the shooting lights Of thy wild eyes. Oh! yet a little while May I behold in thee what I was once, My dear, dear Sister! and this prayer I make, Knowing that Nature never did betray

The heart that loved her; 'tis her privilege, Through all the years of this our life, to lead From joy to joy: for she can so inform The mind that is within us, so impress With quietness and beauty, and so feed With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues, Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men, Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all The dreary intercourse of daily life, Shall e'er prevail against us, or disturb Our cheerful faith, that all which we behold Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon Shine on thee in thy solitary walk;

And let the misty mountain-winds be free To blow against thee: and, in after years, When these wild ecstasies shall be matured Into a sober pleasure; when thy mind

Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms, Thy memory be as a dwelling-place

For all sweet sounds and harmonies; oh! then, If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief, Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts Of tender joy wilt thou remember me,

And these my exhortations! Nor, perchance--

If I should be where I no more can hear Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams Of past existence--wilt thou then forget That on the banks of this delightful stream We stood together; and that I, so long A worshipper of Nature, hither came

Unwearied in that service: rather say





With warmer love--oh! with far deeper zeal Of holier love. Nor wilt thou then forget, That after many wanderings, many years Of absence, these steep woods and lofty cliffs, And this green pastoral landscape, were to me More dear, both for themselves and for thy sake!

William Wordsworth





Lines Left upon a Seat in a Yew-tree

Nay, Traveller! rest. This lonely Yew-tree stands Far from all human dwelling: what if here No sparkling rivulet spread the verdant herb?

What if the bee love not these barren boughs?

Yet, if the wind breathe soft, the curling waves, That break against the shore, shall lull thy mind By one soft impulse saved from vacancy.

--------------------Who he was

That piled these stones and with the mossy sod First covered, and here taught this aged Tree With its dark arms to form a circling bower, I well remember.--He was one who owned No common soul. In youth by science nursed, And led by nature into a wild scene

Of lofty hopes, he to the world went forth A favoured Being, knowing no desire

Which genius did not hallow; 'gainst the taint Of dissolute tongues, and jealousy, and hate, And scorn,--against all enemies prepared, All but neglect. The world, for so it thought, Owed him no service; wherefore he at once With indignation turned himself away, And with the food of pride sustained his soul In solitude.--Stranger! these gloomy boughs Had charms for him; and here he loved to sit, His only visitants a straggling sheep, The stone-chat, or the glancing sand-piper: And on these barren rocks, with fern and heath, And juniper and thistle, sprinkled o'er, Fixing his downcast eye, he many an hour A morbid pleasure nourished, tracing here An emblem of his own unfruitful life: And, lifting up his head, he then would gaze On the more distant scene,--how lovely 'tis Thou seest,--and he would gaze till it became Far lovelier, and his heart could not sustain The beauty, still more beauteous! Nor, that time, When nature had subdued him to herself, Would he forget those Beings to whose minds, Warm from the labours of benevolence, The world, and human life, appeared a scene Of kindred loveliness: then he would sigh, Inly disturbed, to think that others felt What he must never feel: and so, lost Man!

On visionary views would fancy feed,

Till his eye streamed with tears. In this deep vale He died,--this seat his only monument.

If Thou be one whose heart the holy forms Of young imagination have kept pure,

Stranger! henceforth be warned; and know that pride, Howe'er disguised in its own majesty, Is littleness; that he, who feels contempt





For any living thing, hath faculties

Which he has never used; that thought with him Is in its infancy. The man whose eye

Is ever on himself doth look on one,

The least of Nature's works, one who might move The wise man to that scorn which wisdom holds Unlawful, ever. O be wiser, Thou!

Instructed that true knowledge leads to love; True dignity abides with him alone

Who, in the silent hour of inward thought, Can still suspect, and still revere himself In lowliness of heart.

William Wordsworth





Lines written as a School Exercise at Hawkshead, Anno Aetatis

"And has the Sun his flaming chariot driven Two hundred times around the ring of heaven, Since Science first, with all her sacred train, Beneath yon roof began her heavenly reign?

While thus I mused, methought, before mine eyes, The Power of EDUCATION seemed to rise; Not she whose rigid precepts trained the boy Dead to the sense of every finer joy; Nor that vile wretch who bade the tender age Spurn Reason's law and humour Passion's rage; But she who trains the generous British youth In the bright paths of fair majestic Truth: Emerging slow from Academus' grove

In heavenly majesty she seemed to move.

Stern was her forehead, but a smile serene

'Softened the terrors of her awful mien.'

Close at her side were all the powers, designed To curb, exalt, reform the tender mind: With panting breast, now pale as winter snows, Now flushed as Hebe, Emulation rose;

Shame followed after with reverted eye, And hue far deeper than the Tyrian dye; Last Industry appeared with steady pace, A smile sat beaming on her pensive face.

I gazed upon the visionary train,

Threw back my eyes, returned, and gazed again.

When lo! the heavenly goddess thus began, Through all my frame the pleasing accents ran.

"'When Superstition left the golden light And fled indignant to the shades of night; When pure Religion reared the peaceful breast And lulled the warring passions into rest, Drove far away the savage thoughts that roll In the dark mansions of the bigot's soul, Enlivening Hope displayed her cheerful ray, And beamed on Britain's sons a brighter day; So when on Ocean's face the storm subsides, Hushed are the winds and silent are the tides; The God of day, in all the pomp of light, Moves through the vault of heaven, and dissipates the night;

Wide o'er the main a trembling lustre plays, The glittering waves reflect the dazzling blaze Science with joy saw Superstition fly Before the lustre of Religion's eye;

With rapture she beheld Britannia smile, Clapped her strong wings, and sought the cheerful isle, The shades of night no more the soul involve, She sheds her beam, and, lo! the shades dissolve; No jarring monks, to gloomy cell confined, With mazy rules perplex the weary mind;





No shadowy forms entice the soul aside, Secure she walks, Philosophy her guide.

Britain, who long her warriors had adored, And deemed all merit centred in the sword; Britain, who thought to stain the field was fame, Now honoured Edward's less than Bacon's name.

Her sons no more in listed fields advance To ride the ring, or toss the beamy lance; No longer steel their indurated hearts To the mild influence of the finer arts; Quick to the secret grotto they retire To court majestic truth, or wake the golden lyre; By generous Emulation taught to rise, The seats of learning brave the distant skies.

Then noble Sandys, inspired with great design, Reared Hawkshead's happy roof, and called it mine.

There have I loved to show the tender age The golden precepts of the classic page; To lead the mind to those Elysian plains Where, throned in gold, immortal Science reigns; Fair to the view is sacred Truth displayed, In all the majesty of light arrayed,

To teach, on rapid wings, the curious soul To roam from heaven to heaven, from pole to pole, From thence to search the mystic cause of things And follow Nature to her secret springs; Nor less to guide the fluctuating youth Firm in the sacred paths of moral truth, To regulate the mind's disordered frame, And quench the passions kindling into flame; The glimmering fires of Virtue to enlarge, And purge from Vice's dross my tender charge.

Oft have I said, the paths of Fame pursue, And all that Virtue dictates, dare to do; Go to the world, peruse the book of man, And learn from thence thy own defects to scan; Severely honest, break no plighted trust, But coldly rest not here--be more than just; Join to the rigours of the sires of Rome The gentler manners of the private dome; When Virtue weeps in agony of woe,

Teach from the heart the tender tear to flow; If Pleasure's soothing song thy soul entice, Or all the gaudy pomp of splendid Vice, Arise superior to the Siren's power,


Hear Britain's sons rehearse thy praise with joy, Look up to heaven, and bless his darling boy.





If e'er these precepts quelled the passions' strife, If e'er they smoothed the rugged walks of life, If e'er they pointed forth the blissful way That guides the spirit to eternal day, Do thou, if gratitude inspire thy breast, Spurn the soft fetters of lethargic rest.

Awake, awake! and snatch the slumbering lyre, Let this bright morn and Sandys the song inspire.'

"I looked obedience: the celestial Fair Smiled like the morn, and vanished into air."

William Wordsworth





Lines Written In Early Spring

I HEARD a thousand blended notes,

While in a grove I sate reclined,

In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts Bring sad thoughts to the mind.

To her fair works did Nature link

The human soul that through me ran;

And much it grieved my heart to think What man has made of man.

Through primrose tufts, in that green bower, The periwinkle trailed its wreaths;

And 'tis my faith that every flower

Enjoys the air it breathes.

The birds around me hopped and played, Their thoughts I cannot measure:---

But the least motion which they made, It seemed a thrill of pleasure.

The budding twigs spread out their fan, To catch the breezy air;

And I must think, do all I can,

That there was pleasure there.

If this belief from heaven be sent,

If such be Nature's holy plan,

Have I not reason to lament

What man has made of man?

William Wordsworth






Milton! thou shouldst be living at this hour; England hath need of thee: she is a fen Of stagnant waters: altar, sword, and pen, Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower, Have forfeited their ancient English dower Of inward happiness. We are selfish men; Oh! raise us up, return to us again;

And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power.

Thy soul was like a Star, and dwelt apart; Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea: Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free, So didst thou travel on life's common way, In cheerful godliness; and yet thy heart The lowliest duties on herself did lay.

William Wordsworth





Lucy Gray

Oft I had heard of Lucy Gray:

And, when I crossed the wild,

I chanced to see at break of day

The solitary child.

No mate, no comrade Lucy knew;

She dwelt on a wide moor,

--The sweetest thing that ever grew

Beside a human door!

You yet may spy the fawn at play,

The hare upon the green;

But the sweet face of Lucy Gray

Will never more be seen.

"To-night will be a stormy night--

You to the town must go;

And take a lantern, Child, to light

Your mother through the snow."

"That, Father! will I gladly do:

'Tis scarcely afternoon--

The minster-clock has just struck two, And yonder is the moon!"

At this the Father raised his hook,

And snapped a faggot-band;

He plied his work;--and Lucy took

The lantern in her hand.

Not blither is the mountain roe:

With many a wanton stroke

Her feet disperse the powdery snow,

That rises up like smoke.

The storm came on before its time:

She wandered up and down;

And many a hill did Lucy climb:

But never reached the town.

The wretched parents all that night

Went shouting far and wide;

But there was neither sound nor sight To serve them for a guide.

At day-break on a hill they stood

That overlooked the moor;

And thence they saw the bridge of wood, A furlong from their door.

They wept--and, turning homeward, cried,

"In heaven we all shall meet;"





--When in the snow the mother spied

The print of Lucy's feet.

Then downwards from the steep hill's edge They tracked the footmarks small;

And through the broken hawthorn hedge, And by the long stone-wall;

And then an open field they crossed:

The marks were still the same;

They tracked them on, nor ever lost;

And to the bridge they came.

They followed from the snowy bank

Those footmarks, one by one,

Into the middle of the plank;

And further there were none!

--Yet some maintain that to this day

She is a living child;

That you may see sweet Lucy Gray

Upon the lonesome wild.

O'er rough and smooth she trips along, And never looks behind;

And sings a solitary song

That whistles in the wind.

William Wordsworth





Lucy i

STRANGE fits of passion have I known: And I will dare to tell,

But in the lover's ear alone,

What once to me befell.

When she I loved look'd every day

Fresh as a rose in June,

I to her cottage bent my way,

Beneath an evening moon.

Upon the moon I fix'd my eye,

All over the wide lea;

With quickening pace my horse drew nigh Those paths so dear to me.

And now we reach'd the orchard-plot;

And, as we climb'd the hill,

The sinking moon to Lucy's cot

Came near and nearer still.

In one of those sweet dreams I slept, Kind Nature's gentlest boon!

And all the while my eyes I kept

On the descending moon.

My horse moved on; hoof after hoof

He raised, and never stopp'd:

When down behind the cottage roof,

At once, the bright moon dropp'd.

What fond and wayward thoughts will slide Into a lover's head!

'O mercy!' to myself I cried,

'If Lucy should be dead!'

William Wordsworth





Lucy ii

SHE dwelt among the untrodden ways

Beside the springs of Dove,

A Maid whom there were none to praise And very few to love:

A violet by a mossy stone

Half hidden from the eye!

Fair as a star, when only one

Is shining in the sky.

She lived unknown, and few could know When Lucy ceased to be;

But she is in her grave, and oh,

The difference to me!

William Wordsworth





Lucy iii

I TRAVELL'D among unknown men,

In lands beyond the sea;

Nor, England! did I know till then

What love I bore to thee.

'Tis past, that melancholy dream!

Nor will I quit thy shore

A second time; for still I seem

To love thee more and more.

Among thy mountains did I feel

The joy of my desire;

And she I cherish'd turn'd her wheel

Beside an English fire.

Thy mornings showed, thy nights conceal'd, The bowers where Lucy played;

And thine too is the last green field That Lucy's eyes survey'd.

William Wordsworth





Lucy iv

THREE years she grew in sun and shower; Then Nature said, 'A lovelier flower

On earth was never sown;

This child I to myself will take;

She shall be mine, and I will make

A lady of my own.

"Myself will to my darling be

Both law and impulse: and with me

The girl, in rock and plain,

In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, Shall feel an overseeing power

To kindle or restrain.

'She shall be sportive as the fawn

That wild with glee across the lawn

Or up the mountain springs;

And hers shall be the breathing balm, And hers the silence and the calm

Of mute insensate things.

'The floating clouds their state shall lend To her; for her the willow bend;

Nor shall she fail to see

Even in the motions of the storm

Grace that shall mould the maiden's form By silent sympathy.

'The stars of midnight shall be dear

To her; and she shall lean her ear

In many a secret place

Where rivulets dance their wayward round, And beauty born of murmuring sound

Shall pass into her face.

'And vital feelings of delight

Shall rear her form to stately height, Her virgin bosom swell;

Such thoughts to Lucy I will give

While she and I together live

Here in this happy dell.'

Thus Nature spake--The work was done--

How soon my Lucy's race was run!

She died, and left to me

This heath, this calm, and quiet scene; The memory of what has been,

And never more will be.

William Wordsworth





Lucy v

A SLUMBER did my spirit seal;

I had no human fears:

She seem'd a thing that could not feel The touch of earthly years.

No motion has she now, no force;

She neither hears nor sees;

Roll'd round in earth's diurnal course, With rocks, and stones, and trees.

William Wordsworth





Memory

A pen--to register; a key--

That winds through secret wards

Are well assigned to Memory

By allegoric Bards.

As aptly, also, might be given

A Pencil to her hand;

That, softening objects, sometimes even Outstrips the heart's demand;

That smooths foregone distress, the lines Of lingering care subdues,

Long-vanished happiness refines,

And clothes in brighter hues;

Yet, like a tool of Fancy, works

Those Spectres to dilate

That startle Conscience, as she lurks Within her lonely seat.

Oh! that our lives, which flee so fast, In purity were such,

That not an image of the past

Should fear that pencil's touch!

Retirement then might hourly look

Upon a soothing scene,

Age steal to his allotted nook

Contented and serene;

With heart as calm as lakes that sleep, In frosty moonlight glistening;

Or mountain rivers, where they creep

Along a channel smooth and deep,

To their own far-off murmurs listening.

William Wordsworth





Michael: A Pastoral Poem

If from the public way you turn your steps Up the tumultuous brook of Greenhead Ghyll, You will suppose that with an upright path Your feet must struggle; in such bold ascent The pastoral mountains front you, face to face.

But, courage! for around that boisterous brook The mountains have all opened out themselves, And made a hidden valley of their own.

No habitation can be seen; but they

Who journey thither find themselves alone With a few sheep, with rocks and stones, and kites That overhead are sailing in the sky.

It is in truth an utter solitude;

Nor should I have made mention of this Dell But for one object which you might pass by, Might see and notice not. Beside the brook Appears a straggling heap of unhewn stones!

And to that simple object appertains

A story--unenriched with strange events, Yet not unfit, I deem, for the fireside, Or for the summer shade. It was the first Of those domestic tales that spake to me Of shepherds, dwellers in the valleys, men Whom I already loved; not verily

For their own sakes, but for the fields and hills Where was their occupation and abode.

And hence this Tale, while I was yet a Boy Careless of books, yet having felt the power Of Nature, by the gentle agency

Of natural objects, led me on to feel For passions that were not my own, and think (At random and imperfectly indeed)

On man, the heart of man, and human life.

Therefore, although it be a history

Homely and rude, I will relate the same For the delight of a few natural hearts; And, with yet fonder feeling, for the sake Of youthful Poets, who among these hills Will be my second self when I am gone.

UPON the forest-side in Grasmere Vale There dwelt a Shepherd, Michael was his name; An old man, stout of heart, and strong of limb.

His bodily frame had been from youth to age Of an unusual strength: his mind was keen, Intense, and frugal, apt for all affairs, And in his shepherd's calling he was prompt And watchful more than ordinary men.

Hence had he learned the meaning of all winds, Of blasts of every tone; and, oftentimes, When others heeded not, He heard the South Make subterraneous music, like the noise Of bagpipers on distant Highland hills.





The Shepherd, at such warning, of his flock Bethought him, and he to himself would say,

"The winds are now devising work for me!"

And, truly, at all times, the storm, that drives The traveller to a shelter, summoned him Up to the mountains: he had been alone Amid the heart of many thousand mists, That came to him, and left him, on the heights.

So lived he till his eightieth year was past.

And grossly that man errs, who should suppose That the green valleys, and the streams and rocks, Were things indifferent to the Shepherd's thoughts.

Fields, where with cheerful spirits he had breathed The common air; hills, which with vigorous step He had so often climbed; which had impressed So many incidents upon his mind

Of hardship, skill or courage, joy or fear; Which, like a book, preserved the memory Of the dumb animals, whom he had saved, Had fed or sheltered, linking to such acts The certainty of honourable gain;

Those fields, those hills--what could they less? had laid Strong hold on his affections, were to him A pleasurable feeling of blind love,

The pleasure which there is in life itself.

His days had not been passed in singleness.

His Helpmate was a comely matron, old--

Though younger than himself full twenty years.

She was a woman of a stirring life,

Whose heart was in her house: two wheels she had Of antique form; this large, for spinning wool; That small, for flax; and if one wheel had rest It was because the other was at work.

The Pair had but one inmate in their house, An only Child, who had been born to them When Michael, telling o'er his years, began To deem that he was old,--in shepherd's phrase, With one foot in the grave. This only Son, With two brave sheep-dogs tried in many a storm, The one of an inestimable worth,


Sat round the basket piled with oaten cakes, And their plain home-made cheese. Yet when the meal Was ended, Luke (for so the Son was named) And his old Father both betook themselves





To such convenient work as might employ Their hands by the fireside; perhaps to card Wool for the Housewife's spindle, or repair Some injury done to sickle, flail, or scythe, Or other implement of house or field.

Down from the ceiling, by the chimney's edge, That in our ancient uncouth country style With huge and black projection overbrowed Large space beneath, as duly as the light Of day grew dim the Housewife hung a lamp; An aged utensil, which had performed

Service beyond all others of its kind.

Early at evening did it burn--and late, Surviving comrade of uncounted hours, Which, going by from year to year, had found, And left, the couple neither gay perhaps Nor cheerful, yet with objects and with hopes, Living a life of eager industry.

And now, when Luke had reached his eighteenth year, There by the light of this old lamp they sate, Father and Son, while far into the night The Housewife plied her own peculiar work, Making the cottage through the silent hours Murmur as with the sound of summer flies.

This light was famous in its neighbourhood, And was a public symbol of the life

That thrifty Pair had lived. For, as it chanced, Their cottage on a plot of rising ground Stood single, with large prospect, north and south, High into Easedale, up to Dunmail-Raise, And westward to the village near the lake; And from this constant light, so regular And so far seen, the House itself, by all Who dwelt within the limits of the vale, Both old and young, was named THE EVENING STAR.

Thus living on through such a length of years, The Shepherd, if he loved himself, must needs Have loved his Helpmate; but to Michael's heart This son of his old age was yet more dear--

Less from instinctive tenderness, the same Fond spirit that blindly works in the blood of all--

Than that a child, more than all other gifts That earth can offer to declining man, Brings hope with it, and forward-looking thoughts, And stirrings of inquietude, when they By tendency of nature needs must fail.

Exceeding was the love he bare to him, His heart and his heart's joy! For oftentimes Old Michael, while he was a babe in arms, Had done him female service, not alone For pastime and delight, as is the use Of fathers, but with patient mind enforced





To acts of tenderness; and he had rocked His cradle, as with a woman's gentle hand.

And, in a later time, ere yet the Boy Had put on boy's attire, did Michael love, Albeit of a stern unbending mind,

To have the Young-one in his sight, when he Wrought in the field, or on his shepherd's stool Sate with a fettered sheep before him stretched Under the large old oak, that near his door Stood single, and, from matchless depth of shade, Chosen for the Shearer's covert from the sun, Thence in our rustic dialect was called The CLIPPING TREE, a name which yet it bears.

There, while they two were sitting in the shade, With others round them, earnest all and blithe, Would Michael exercise his heart with looks Of fond correction and reproof bestowed Upon the Child, if he disturbed the sheep By catching at their legs, or with his shouts Scared them, while they lay still beneath the shears.

And when by Heaven's good grace the boy grew up A healthy Lad, and carried in his cheek Two steady roses that were five years old; Then Michael from a winter coppice cut With his own hand a sapling, which he hooped With iron, making it throughout in all Due requisites a perfect shepherd's staff, And gave it to the Boy; wherewith equipt He as a watchman oftentimes was placed At gate or gap, to stem or turn the flock; And, to his office prematurely called, There stood the urchin, as you will divine, Something between a hindrance and a help; And for this cause not always, I believe, Receiving from his Father hire of praise; Though nought was left undone which staff, or voice, Or looks, or threatening gestures, could perform.


Feelings and emanations--things which were Light to the sun and music to the wind; And that the old Man's heart seemed born again?

Thus in his Father's sight the Boy grew up: And now, when he had reached his eighteenth year, He was his comfort and his daily hope.

While in this sort the simple household lived From day to day, to Michael's ear there came





Distressful tidings. Long before the time Of which I speak, the Shepherd had been bound In surety for his brother's son, a man Of an industrious life, and ample means; But unforeseen misfortunes suddenly

Had prest upon him; and old Michael now Was summoned to discharge the forfeiture, A grievous penalty, but little less

Than half his substance. This unlooked-for claim, At the first hearing, for a moment took More hope out of his life than he supposed That any old man ever could have lost.

As soon as he had armed himself with strength To look his trouble in the face, it seemed The Shepherd's sole resource to sell at once A portion of his patrimonial fields.

Such was his first resolve; he thought again, And his heart failed him. "Isabel," said he, Two evenings after he had heard the news,

"I have been toiling more than seventy years, And in the open sunshine of God's love Have we all lived; yet if these fields of ours Should pass into a stranger's hand, I think That I could not lie quiet in my grave.

Our lot is a hard lot; the sun himself Has scarcely been more diligent than I; And I have lived to be a fool at last To my own family. An evil man

That was, and made an evil choice, if he Were false to us; and if he were not false, There are ten thousand to whom loss like this Had been no sorrow. I forgive him;--but

'Twere better to be dumb than to talk thus.

When I began, my purpose was to speak Of remedies and of a cheerful hope.

Our Luke shall leave us, Isabel; the land Shall not go from us, and it shall be free; He shall possess it, free as is the wind That passes over it. We have, thou know'st, Another kinsman--he will be our friend In this distress. He is a prosperous man, Thriving in trade--and Luke to him shall go, And with his kinsman's help and his own thrift He quickly will repair this loss, and then He may return to us. If here he stay, What can be done? Where every one is poor, What can be gained?"

At this the old Man paused,

And Isabel sat silent, for her mind

Was busy, looking back into past times.

There's Richard Bateman, thought she to herself, He was a parish-boy--at the church-door





They made a gathering for him, shillings, pence And halfpennies, wherewith the neighbours bought A basket, which they filled with pedlar's wares; And, with this basket on his arm, the lad Went up to London, found a master there, Who, out of many, chose the trusty boy To go and overlook his merchandise

Beyond the seas; where he grew wondrous rich, And left estates and monies to the poor, And, at his birth-place, built a chapel, floored With marble which he sent from foreign lands.

These thoughts, and many others of like sort, Passed quickly through the mind of Isabel, And her face brightened. The old Man was glad, And thus resumed:--"Well, Isabel! this scheme These two days, has been meat and drink to me.

Far more than we have lost is left us yet.

--We have enough--I wish indeed that I Were younger;--but this hope is a good hope.

--Make ready Luke's best garments, of the best Buy for him more, and let us send him forth To-morrow, or the next day, or to-night:

--If he 'could' go, the Boy should go tonight."

Here Michael ceased, and to the fields went forth With a light heart. The Housewife for five days Was restless morn and night, and all day long Wrought on with her best fingers to prepare Things needful for the journey of her son.

But Isabel was glad when Sunday came

To stop her in her work: for, when she lay By Michael's side, she through the last two nights Heard him, how he was troubled in his sleep: And when they rose at morning she could see That all his hopes were gone. That day at noon She said to Luke, while they two by themselves Were sitting at the door, "Thou must not go: We have no other Child but thee to lose None to remember--do not go away,

For if thou leave thy Father he will die."


Recovered heart. That evening her best fare Did she bring forth, and all together sat Like happy people round a Christmas fire.

With daylight Isabel resumed her work; And all the ensuing week the house appeared As cheerful as a grove in Spring: at length The expected letter from their kinsman came, With kind assurances that he would do His utmost for the welfare of the Boy; To which, requests were added, that forthwith He might be sent to him. Ten times or more





The letter was read over; Isabel

Went forth to show it to the neighbours round; Nor was there at that time on English land A prouder heart than Luke's. When Isabel Had to her house returned, the old Man said,

"He shall depart to-morrow." To this word The Housewife answered, talking much of things Which, if at such short notice he should go, Would surely be forgotten. But at length She gave consent, and Michael was at ease.

Near the tumultuous brook of Greenhead Ghyll, In that deep valley, Michael had designed To build a Sheepfold; and, before he heard The tidings of his melancholy loss,

For this same purpose he had gathered up A heap of stones, which by the streamlet's edge Lay thrown together, ready for the work.

With Luke that evening thitherward he walked: And soon as they had reached the place he stopped, And thus the old Man spake to him:--"My Son, To-morrow thou wilt leave me: with full heart I look upon thee, for thou art the same That wert a promise to me ere thy birth, And all thy life hast been my daily joy.

I will relate to thee some little part Of our two histories; 'twill do thee good When thou art from me, even if I should touch On things thou canst not know of.----After thou First cam'st into the world--as oft befalls To new-born infants--thou didst sleep away Two days, and blessings from thy Father's tongue Then fell upon thee. Day by day passed on, And still I loved thee with increasing love.

Never to living ear came sweeter sounds Than when I heard thee by our own fireside First uttering, without words, a natural tune; While thou, a feeding babe, didst in thy joy Sing at thy Mother's breast. Month followed month, And in the open fields my life was passed And on the mountains; else I think that thou Hadst been brought up upon thy Father's knees.

But we were playmates, Luke: among these hills, As well thou knowest, in us the old and young Have played together, nor with me didst thou Lack any pleasure which a boy can know."

Luke had a manly heart; but at these words He sobbed aloud. The old Man grasped his hand, And said, "Nay, do not take it so--I see That these are things of which I need not speak.

--Even to the utmost I have been to thee A kind and a good Father: and herein

I but repay a gift which I myself





Received at others' hands; for, though now old Beyond the common life of man, I still Remember them who loved me in my youth.

Both of them sleep together: here they lived, As all their Forefathers had done; and when At length their time was come, they were not loth To give their bodies to the family mould.

I wished that thou should'st live the life they lived: But, 'tis a long time to look back, my Son, And see so little gain from threescore years.

These fields were burthened when they came to me; Till I was forty years of age, not more Than half of my inheritance was mine.

I toiled and toiled; God blessed me in my work, And till these three weeks past the land was free.

--It looks as if it never could endure Another Master. Heaven forgive me, Luke, If I judge ill for thee, but it seems good That thou should'st go."

At this the old Man paused;

Then, pointing to the stones near which they stood, Thus, after a short silence, he resumed:

"This was a work for us; and now, my Son, It is a work for me. But, lay one stone--

Here, lay it for me, Luke, with thine own hands.

Nay, Boy, be of good hope;--we both may live To see a better day. At eighty-four

I still am strong and hale;--do thou thy part; I will do mine.--I will begin again

With many tasks that were resigned to thee: Up to the heights, and in among the storms, Will I without thee go again, and do

All works which I was wont to do alone, Before I knew thy face.--Heaven bless thee, Boy!

Thy heart these two weeks has been beating fast With many hopes; it should be so--yes--yes--


Only by links of love: when thou art gone, What will be left to us!--But, I forget My purposes. Lay now the corner-stone, As I requested; and hereafter, Luke,

When thou art gone away, should evil men Be thy companions, think of me, my Son, And of this moment; hither turn thy thoughts, And God will strengthen thee: amid all fear And all temptation, Luke, I pray that thou May'st bear in mind the life thy Fathers lived, Who, being innocent, did for that cause Bestir them in good deeds. Now, fare thee well--

When thou return'st, thou in this place wilt see A work which is not here: a covenant





'Twill be between us; but, whatever fate Befall thee, I shall love thee to the last, And bear thy memory with me to the grave."

The Shepherd ended here; and Luke stooped down, And, as his Father had requested, laid The first stone of the Sheepfold. At the sight The old Man's grief broke from him; to his heart He pressed his Son, he kissed him and wept; And to the house together they returned.

--Hushed was that House in peace, or seeming peace, Ere the night fell:--with morrow's dawn the Boy Began his journey, and when he had reached The public way, he put on a bold face; And all the neighbours, as he passed their doors, Came forth with wishes and with farewell prayers, That followed him till he was out of sight.

A good report did from their Kinsman come, Of Luke and his well-doing: and the Boy Wrote loving letters, full of wondrous news, Which, as the Housewife phrased it, were throughout

"The prettiest letters that were ever seen."

Both parents read them with rejoicing hearts.

So, many months passed on: and once again The Shepherd went about his daily work With confident and cheerful thoughts; and now Sometimes when he could find a leisure hour He to that valley took his way, and there Wrought at the Sheepfold. Meantime Luke began To slacken in his duty; and, at length, He in the dissolute city gave himself To evil courses: ignominy and shame

Fell on him, so that he was driven at last To seek a hiding-place beyond the seas.

There is a comfort in the strength of love;

'Twill make a thing endurable, which else Would overset the brain, or break the heart: I have conversed with more than one who well Remember the old Man, and what he was Years after he had heard this heavy news.

His bodily frame had been from youth to age Of an unusual strength. Among the rocks He went, and still looked up to sun and cloud, And listened to the wind; and, as before, Performed all kinds of labour for his sheep, And for the land, his small inheritance.

And to that hollow dell from time to time Did he repair, to build the Fold of which His flock had need. 'Tis not forgotten yet The pity which was then in every heart For the old Man--and 'tis believed by all That many and many a day he thither went, And never lifted up a single stone.





There, by the Sheepfold, sometimes was he seen Sitting alone, or with his faithful Dog, Then old, beside him, lying at his feet.

The length of full seven years, from time to time, He at the building of this Sheepfold wrought, And left the work unfinished when he died.

Three years, or little more, did Isabel Survive her Husband: at her death the estate Was sold, and went into a stranger's hand.

The Cottage which was named the EVENING STAR

Is gone--the ploughshare has been through the ground On which it stood; great changes have been wrought In all the neighbourhood:--yet the oak is left That grew beside their door; and the remains Of the unfinished Sheepfold may be seen Beside the boisterous brook of Greenhead Ghyll.

William Wordsworth





Most Sweet it is

. Most sweet it is with unuplifted eyes To pace the ground, if path be there or none, While a fair region round the traveller lies Which he forbears again to look upon; Pleased rather with some soft ideal scene, The work of Fancy, or some happy tone Of meditation, slipping in between

The beauty coming and the beauty gone.

If Thought and Love desert us, from that day Let us break off all commerce with the Muse: With Thought and Love companions of our way, Whate'er the senses take or may refuse, The Mind's internal heaven shall shed her dews Of inspiration on the humblest lay.

William Wordsworth





Mother's Return, The

A month, sweet Little-ones, is past

Since your dear Mother went away,---

And she tomorrow will return;

Tomorrow is the happy day.

O blessed tidings! thought of joy!

The eldest heard with steady glee;

Silent he stood; then laughed amain,---

And shouted, " Mother, come to me!"

Louder and louder did he shout,

With witless hope to bring her near;

"Nay, patience! patience, little boy!

Your tender mother cannot hear."

I told of hills, and far-off town,

And long, long vale to travel through;---

He listens, puzzled, sore perplexed,

But he submits; what can he do ?

No strife disturbs his sister's breast; She wars not with the mystery

Of time and distance, night and day;

The bonds of our humanity.

Her joy is like an instinct, joy

Of kitten, bird, or summer fly;

She dances, runs without an aim,

She chatters in her ecstasy.

Her brother now takes up the note,

And echoes back his sister's glee;

They hug the infant in my arms,

As if to force his sympathy.

Then, settling into fond discourse,

We rested in the garden bower;

While sweetly shone the evening sun

In his departing hour.

We told o'er all that we had done,---

Our rambles by the swift brook's side Far as the willow-skirted pool,

Where two fair swans together glide.

We talked of change, of winter gone,

Of green leaves on the hawthorn spray, Of birds that build their nests and sing And all "since Mother went away!"

To her these tales they will repeat,

To her our new-born tribes will show,





The goslings green, the ass's colt,

The lambs that in the meadow go.

---But, see, the evening star comes forth!

To bed the children must depart;

A moment's heaviness they feel,

A sadness at the heart;

'Tis gone---and in a merry fit

They run up stairs in gamesome race;

I, too, infected by their mood,

I could have joined the wanton chase.

Five minutes past---and, O the change!

Asleep upon their beds they lie;

Their buy limbs in perfect rest,

And closed the sparkling eye.

William Wordsworth





Mutability

FROM low to high doth dissolution climb, And sink from high to low, along a scale Of awful notes, whose concord shall not fail; A musical but melancholy chime,

Which they can hear who meddle not with crime, Nor avarice, nor over-anxious care.

Truth fails not; but her outward forms that bear The longest date do melt like frosty rime, That in the morning whiten'd hill and plain And is no more; drop like the tower sublime Of yesterday, which royally did wear

His crown of weeds, but could not even sustain Some casual shout that broke the silent air, Or the unimaginable touch of Time.

William Wordsworth





My Heart Leaps Up

My heart leaps up when I behold

A rainbow in the sky:

So was it when my life began;

So is it now I am a man;

So be it when I shall grow old,

Or let me die!

The Child is father of the Man;

And I could wish my days to be

Bound each to each by natural piety.

William Wordsworth






. Another year!--another deadly blow!

Another mighty Empire overthrown!

And We are left, or shall be left, alone; The last that dare to struggle with the Foe.

'Tis well! from this day forward we shall know That in ourselves our safety must be sought; That by our own right hands it must be wrought; That we must stand unpropped, or be laid low.

O dastard whom such foretaste doth not cheer!

We shall exult, if they who rule the land Be men who hold its many blessings dear, Wise, upright, valiant; not a servile band, Who are to judge of danger which they fear, And honour which they do not understand.

William Wordsworth





Nuns Fret Not at Their Convent's Narrow Room Nuns fret not at their convent's narrow room; And hermits are contented with their cells; And students with their pensive citadels; Maids at the wheel, the weaver at his loom, Sit blithe and happy; bees that soar for bloom, High as the highest Peak of Furness-fells, Will murmur by the hour in foxglove bells: In truth the prison, unto which we doom Ourselves, no prison is: and hence for me, In sundry moods, 'twas pastime to be bound Within the Sonnet's scanty plot of ground; Pleased if some Souls (for such there needs must be) Who have felt the weight of too much liberty, Should find brief solace there, as I have found.

William Wordsworth





Nutting

---------------------It seems a day

(I speak of one from many singled out) One of those heavenly days that cannot die; When, in the eagerness of boyish hope, I left our cottage-threshold, sallying forth With a huge wallet o'er my shoulders slung, A nutting-crook in hand; and turned my steps Tow'rd some far-distant wood, a Figure quaint, Tricked out in proud disguise of cast-off weeds Which for that service had been husbanded, By exhortation of my frugal Dame--

Motley accoutrement, of power to smile At thorns, and brakes, and brambles,--and, in truth, More ragged than need was! O'er pathless rocks, Through beds of matted fern, and tangled thickets, Forcing my way, I came to one dear nook Unvisited, where not a broken bough

Drooped with its withered leaves, ungracious sign Of devastation; but the hazels rose

Tall and erect, with tempting clusters hung, A virgin scene!--A little while I stood, Breathing with such suppression of the heart As joy delights in; and, with wise restraint Voluptuous, fearless of a rival, eyed The banquet;--or beneath the trees I sate Among the flowers, and with the flowers I played; A temper known to those, who, after long And weary expectation, have been blest With sudden happiness beyond all hope.

Perhaps it was a bower beneath whose leaves The violets of five seasons re-appear And fade, unseen by any human eye;

Where fairy water-breaks do murmur on For ever; and I saw the sparkling foam, And--with my cheek on one of those green stones That, fleeced with moss, under the shady trees, Lay round me, scattered like a flock of sheep--

I heard the murmur and the murmuring sound, In that sweet mood when pleasure loves to pay Tribute to ease; and, of its joy secure, The heart luxuriates with indifferent things, Wasting its kindliness on stocks and stones, And on the vacant air. Then up I rose, And dragged to earth both branch and bough, with crash And merciless ravage: and the shady nook Of hazels, and the green and mossy bower, Deformed and sullied, patiently gave up Their quiet being: and, unless I now

Confound my present feelings with the past; Ere from the mutilated bower I turned Exulting, rich beyond the wealth of kings, I felt a sense of pain when I beheld





The silent trees, and saw the intruding sky--

Then, dearest Maiden, move along these shades In gentleness of heart; with gentle hand Touch--for there is a spirit in the woods.

William Wordsworth





O Nightingale! Thou Surely Art

O Nightingale! thou surely art

A creature of a "fiery heart":--

These notes of thine--they pierce and pierce; Tumultuous harmony and fierce!

Thou sing'st as if the God of wine

Had helped thee to a Valentine;

A song in mockery and despite

Of shades, and dews, and silent night; And steady bliss, and all the loves

Now sleeping in these peaceful groves.

I heard a Stock-dove sing or say

His homely tale, this very day;

His voice was buried among trees,

Yet to be come at by the breeze:

He did not cease; but cooed--and cooed; And somewhat pensively he wooed:

He sang of love, with quiet blending, Slow to begin, and never ending;

Of serious faith, and inward glee;

That was the song -- the song for me!

William Wordsworth





Oak and The Broom, The: A Pastoral Poem I

His simple truths did Andrew glean

Beside the babbling rills;

A careful student he had been

Among the woods and hills.

One winter's night, when through the trees The wind was roaring, on his knees

His youngest born did Andrew hold:

And while the rest, a ruddy quire,

Were seated round their blazing fire, This Tale the Shepherd told.

II

"I saw a crag, a lofty stone

As ever tempest beat!

Out of its head an Oak had grown,

A Broom out of its feet.

The time was March, a cheerful noon--

The thaw-wind, with the breath of June, Breathed gently from the warm south-west: When, in a voice sedate with age,

This Oak, a giant and a sage,

His neighbour thus addressed:--

III

"'Eight weary weeks, through rock and clay, Along this mountain's edge,

The Frost hath wrought both night and day, Wedge driving after wedge.

Look up! and think, above your head

What trouble, surely, will be bred;

Last night I heard a crash--'tis true, The splinters took another road--

I see them yonder--what a load

For such a Thing as you!

IV

"'You are preparing as before,

To deck your slender shape;

And yet, just three years back--no more--

You had a strange escape:

Down from yon cliff a fragment broke; It thundered down, with fire and smoke, And hitherward pursued its way;

This ponderous block was caught by me, And o'er your head, as you may see,

'Tis hanging to this day!





V

"'If breeze or bird to this rough steep Your kind's first seed did bear;

The breeze had better been asleep,

The bird caught in a snare:

For you and your green twigs decoy

The little witless shepherd-boy

To come and slumber in your bower;

And, trust me, on some sultry noon,

Both you and he, Heaven knows how soon!

Will perish in one hour.

VI

"'From me this friendly warning take'--

The Broom began to doze,

And thus, to keep herself awake,

Did gently interpose:

'My thanks for your discourse are due; That more than what you say is true,

I know, and I have known it long;

Frail is the bond by which we hold

Our being, whether young or old,

Wise, foolish, weak, or strong.

VII

"'Disasters, do the best we can, Will reach both great and small;

And he is oft the wisest man,

Who is not wise at all.

For me, why should I wish to roam?

This spot is my paternal home,

It is my pleasant heritage;

My father many a happy year,

Spread here his careless blossoms, here Attained a good old age.

VIII

"'Even such as his may be my lot.

What cause have I to haunt

My heart with terrors? Am I not

In truth a favoured plant!

On me such bounty Summer pours,

That I am covered o'er with flowers;

And, when the Frost is in the sky,

My branches are so fresh and gay

That you might look at me and say,

This Plant can never die.





IX

"'The butterfly, all green and gold, To me hath often flown,

Here in my blossoms to behold

Wings lovely as his own.

When grass is chill with rain or dew, Beneath my shade, the mother-ewe

Lies with her infant lamb; I see

The love they to each other make,

And the sweet joy which they partake, It is a joy to me.'

X

"Her voice was blithe, her heart was light; The Broom might have pursued

Her speech, until the stars of night

Their journey had renewed;

But in the branches of the oak

Two ravens now began to croak

Their nuptial song, a gladsome air;

And to her own green bower the breeze That instant brought two stripling bees To rest, or murmur there.

XI

"One night, my Children! from the north There came a furious blast;

At break of day I ventured forth,

And near the cliff I passed.

The storm had fallen upon the Oak,

And struck him with a mighty stroke,

And whirled, and whirled him far away; And, in one hospitable cleft,

The little careless Broom was left

To live for many a day."

William Wordsworth






. These times strike monied worldlings with dismay: Even rich men, brave by nature, taint the air With words of apprehension and despair: While tens of thousands, thinking on the affray, Men unto whom sufficient for the day

And minds not stinted or untilled are given, Sound, healthy, children of the God of heaven, Are cheerful as the rising sun in May.

What do we gather hence but firmer faith That every gift of noble origin

Is breathed upon by Hope's perpetual breath; That virtue and the faculties within

Are vital,--and that riches are akin

To fear, to change, to cowardice, and death?

William Wordsworth





Ode Composed On A May Morning

WHILE from the purpling east departs

The star that led the dawn,

Blithe Flora from her couch upstarts, For May is on the lawn.

A quickening hope, a freshening glee, Foreran the expected Power,

Whose first-drawn breath, from bush and tree, Shakes off that pearly shower.

All Nature welcomes Her whose sway

Tempers the year's extremes;

Who scattereth lustres o'er noon-day, Like morning's dewy gleams;

While mellow warble, sprightly trill, The tremulous heart excite;

And hums the balmy air to still

The balance of delight.

Time was, blest Power! when youth and maids At peep of dawn would rise,

And wander forth, in forest glades

Thy birth to solemnize.

Though mute the song---to grace the rite Untouched the hawthorn bough,

Thy Spirit triumphs o'er the slight;

Man changes, but not Thou!

Thy feathered Lieges bill and wings

In love's disport employ;

Warmed by thy influence, creeping things Awake to silent joy:

Queen art thou still for each gay plant Where the slim wild deer roves;

And served in depths where fishes haunt Their own mysterious groves.

Cloud-piercing peak, and trackless heath, Instinctive homage pay;

Nor wants the dim-lit cave a wreath

To honor thee, sweet May!

Where cities fanned by thy brisk airs Behold a smokeless sky,

Their puniest flower-pot-nursling dares To open a bright eye.

And if, on this thy natal morn,

The pole, from which thy name

Hath not departed, stands forlorn

Of song and dance and game;

Still from the village-green a vow

Aspires to thee addrest,

Wherever peace is on the brow,





Or love within the breast.

Yes! where Love nestles thou canst teach The soul to love the more;

Hearts also shall thy lessons reach

That never loved before.

Stript is the haughty one of pride,

The bashful freed from fear,

While rising, like the ocean-tide,

In flow the joyous year.

Hush, feeble lyre! weak words refuse

The service to prolong!

To yon exulting thrush the Muse

Entrusts the imperfect song;

His voice shall chant, in accents clear, Throughout the live-long day,

Till the first silver star appear,

The sovereignty of May.

William Wordsworth





Ode On Intimations Of Immortality

From Recollections of Early Childhood The Child is father of the Man;

And I could wish my days to be

Bound each to each by natural piety.

I

There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream, The earth, and every common sight,

To me did seem

Apparelled in celestial light,

The glory and the freshness of a dream.

It is not now as it hath been of yore;--

Turn wheresoe'er I may,

By night or day,

The things which I have seen I now can see no more.

II

The Rainbow comes and goes,

And lovely is the Rose,

The Moon doth with delight

Look round her when the heavens are bare; Waters on a starry night

Are beautiful and fair;

The sunshine is a glorious birth;

But yet I know, where'er I go,

That there hath past away a glory from the earth.

III

Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song, And while the young lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound,

To me alone there came a thought of grief: A timely utterance gave that thought relief, And I again am strong:

The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep; No more shall grief of mine the season wrong; I hear the Echoes through the mountains throng, The Winds come to me from the fields of sleep, And all the earth is gay;

Land and sea

Give themselves up to jollity,

And with the heart of May

Doth every Beast keep holiday;--

Thou Child of Joy,

Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy Shepherd-boy!





IV

Ye blessèd Creatures, I have heard the call Ye to each other make; I see

The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee; My heart is at your festival,

My head hath its coronal,

The fulness of your bliss, I feel--I feel it all.

Oh evil day! if I were sullen

While the Earth herself is adorning,

This sweet May-morning,

And the Children are culling

On every side,

In a thousand valleys far and wide,

Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm, And the Babe leaps up on his Mother's arm:--

I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!

--But there's a Tree, of many, one,

A single Field which I have looked upon, Both of them speak of something that is gone: The Pansy at my feet

Doth the same tale repeat:

Whither is fled the visionary gleam?

Where is it now, the glory and the dream?

V

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting,

And cometh from afar:

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness,

But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home:

Heaven lies about us in our infancy!

Shades of the prison-house begin to close Upon the growing Boy,

But He beholds the light, and whence it flows, He sees it in his joy;

The Youth, who daily farther from the east Must travel, still is Nature's Priest, And by the vision splendid

Is on his way attended;

At length the Man perceives it die away, And fade into the light of common day.

VI





Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own; Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind, And, even with something of a Mother's mind, And no unworthy aim,

The homely Nurse doth all she can

To make her Foster-child, her Inmate Man, Forget the glories he hath known,

And that imperial palace whence he came.

VII

Behold the Child among his new-born blisses, A six years' Darling of a pigmy size!

See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies, Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses, With light upon him from his father's eyes!

See, at his feet, some little plan or chart, Some fragment from his dream of human life, Shaped by himself with newly-learned art; A wedding or a festival,

A mourning or a funeral;

And this hath now his heart,

And unto this he frames his song:

Then will he fit his tongue

To dialogues of business, love, or strife; But it will not be long

Ere this be thrown aside,

And with new joy and pride

The little Actor cons another part;

Filling from time to time his 'humorous stage'

With all the Persons, down to palsied Age, That Life brings with her in her equipage; As if his whole vocation

Were endless imitation.

VIII

Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie Thy Soul's immensity;

Thou best Philosopher, who yet dost keep Thy heritage, thou Eye among the blind, That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep, Haunted for ever by the eternal mind,--

Might Prophet! Seer blest!

On whom those truths do rest,

Which we are toiling all our lives to find, In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave; Thou, over whom thy Immortality

Broods like the Day, a Master o'er a Slave,





A Presence which is not to be put by;

[To whom the grave

Is but a lonely bed without the sense or sight Of day or the warm light,

A place of thought where we in waiting lie;]

Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height, Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke The years to bring the inevitable yoke, Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?

Full soon thy Soul shall have her earthly freight, And custom lie upon thee with a weight, Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!

IX

O joy! that in our embers

Is something that doth live,

That nature yet remembers

What was so fugitive!

The thought of our past years in me doth breed Perpetual benediction: not indeed

For that which is most worthy to be blest; Delight and liberty, the simple creed Of Childhood, whether busy or at rest, With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--

Not for these I raise

The song of thanks and praise;

But for those obstinate questionings

Of sense and outward things,

Fallings from us, vanishings;

Blank misgivings of a Creature

Moving about in worlds not realised,

High instincts before which our mortal Nature Did tremble like a guilty Thing surprised: But for those first affections,

Those shadowy recollections,

Which, be they what they may,

Are yet the fountain-light of all our day, Are yet a master-light of all our seeing; Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make Our noisy years seem moments in the being Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake, To perish never;

Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavor, Nor Man nor Boy,

Nor all that is at enmity with joy,

Can utterly abolish or destroy!

Hence in a season of calm weather

Though inland far we be,

Our Souls have sight of that immortal sea





Which brought us hither,

Can in a moment travel thither,

And see the Children sport upon the shore, And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.

X

Then sing, ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song!

And yet the young Lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound!

We in thought will join your throng,

Ye that pipe and ye that play,

Ye that through your hearts to-day

Feel the gladness of the May!

What though the radiance which was once so bright Be now for ever taken from my sight,

Though nothing can bring back the hour Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower; We will grieve not, rather find

Strength in what remains behind;

In the primal sympathy

Which having been must ever be;

In the soothing thoughts that spring

Out of human suffering;

In the faith that looks through death, In years that bring the philosophic mind.

XI

And O, ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves, Forebode not any severing of our loves!

Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might; I only have relinquished one delight

To live beneath your more habitual sway.

I love the Brooks which down their channels fret, Even more than when I tripped lightly as they; The innocent brightness of a new-born Day Is lovely yet;

The Clouds that gather round the setting sun Do take a sober colouring from an eye That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality; Another race hath been, and other palms are won.

Thanks to the human heart by which we live, Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears, To me the meanest flower that blows can give Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.


William Wordsworth





Ode on Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream, The earth, and every common sight

To me did seem

Apparelled in celestial light,

The glory and the freshness of a dream.

It is not now as it hath been of yore;--

Turn wheresoe'er I may,

By night or day,

The things which I have seen I now can see no more.

The rainbow comes and goes,

And lovely is the rose;

The moon doth with delight

Look round her when the heavens are bare; Waters on a starry night

Are beautiful and fair;

The sunshine is a glorious birth;

But yet I know, where'er I go,

That there hath past away a glory from the earth.

Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song, And while the young lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound,

To me alone there came a thought of grief: A timely utterance gave that thought relief, And I again am strong.

The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep,--

No more shall grief of mine the season wrong: I hear the echoes through the mountains throng.

The winds come to me from the fields of sleep, And all the earth is gay;

Land and sea

Give themselves up to jollity,

And with the heart of May

Doth every beast keep holiday;--

Thou child of joy,

Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy Shepherd-boy!

Ye bless&eacute;d Creatures, I have heard the call Ye to each other make; I see

The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee; My heart is at your festival,

My head hath its coronal,

The fulness of your bliss, I feel--I feel it all.

O evil day! if I were sullen

While Earth herself is adorning

This sweet May-morning;

And the children are culling

On every side

In a thousand valleys far and wide

Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm,





And the babe leaps up on his mother's arm:--

I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!

--But there's a tree, of many, one,

A single field which I have look'd upon, Both of them speak of something that is gone: The pansy at my feet

Doth the same tale repeat:

Whither is fled the visionary gleam?

Where is it now, the glory and the dream?

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting; The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting

And cometh from afar;

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness,

But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home:

Heaven lies about us in our infancy!

Shades of the prison-house begin to close Upon the growing Boy,

But he beholds the light, and whence it flows, He sees it in his joy;

The Youth, who daily farther from the east Must travel, still is Nature's priest, And by the vision splendid

Is on his way attended;

At length the Man perceives it die away, And fade into the light of common day.

Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own; Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind, And, even with something of a mother's mind, And no unworthy aim,

The homely nurse doth all she can

To make her foster-child, her inmate, Man, Forget the glories he hath known,

And that imperial palace whence he came.

Behold the Child among his new-born blisses, A six years' darling of a pigmy size!

See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies, Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses, With light upon him from his father's eyes!

See, at his feet, some little plan or chart, Some fragment from his dream of human life, Shaped by himself with newly-learned art; A wedding or a festival,

A mourning or a funeral;

And this hath now his heart,

And unto this he frames his song:

Then will he fit his tongue





To dialogues of business, love, or strife; But it will not be long

Ere this be thrown aside,

And with new joy and pride

The little actor cons another part;

Filling from time to time his 'humorous stage'

With all the Persons, down to palsied Age, That life brings with her in her equipage; As if his whole vocation

Were endless imitation.

Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie Thy soul's immensity;

Thou best philosopher, who yet dost keep Thy heritage, thou eye among the blind, That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep, Haunted for ever by the eternal Mind,--

Mighty Prophet! Seer blest!

On whom those truths rest

Which we are toiling all our lives to find, In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave; Thou, over whom thy Immortality

Broods like the day, a master o'er a slave, A Presence which is not to be put by; To whom the grave

Is but a lonely bed, without the sense of sight Of day or the warm light,

A place of thoughts where we in waiting lie; Thou little child, yet glorious in the might Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height, Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke The years to bring the inevitable yoke, Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?

Full soon thy soul shall have her earthly freight, And custom lie upon thee with a weight Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!


Is something that doth live,

That Nature yet remembers

What was so fugitive!

The thought of our past years in me doth breed Perpetual benediction: not indeed

For that which is most worthy to be blest, Delight and liberty, the simple creed Of Childhood, whether busy or at rest, With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--

--Not for these I raise

The song of thanks and praise;

But for those obstinate questionings

Of sense and outward things,

Failings from us, vanishings,

Blank misgivings of a creature





Moving about in worlds not realized,

High instincts, before which our mortal nature Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised: But for those first affections,

Those shadowy recollections,

Which, be they what they may,

Are yet the fountain-light of all our day, Are yet a master-light of all our seeing; Uphold us--cherish--and have power to make Our noisy years seem moments in the being Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake, To perish never;

Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour, Nor man nor boy,

Nor all that is at enmity with joy,

Can utterly abolish or destroy!

Hence, in a season of calm weather

Though inland far we be,

Our souls have sight of that immortal sea Which brought us hither;

Can in a moment travel thither--

And see the children sport upon the shore, And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.

Then, sing, ye birds, sing, sing a joyous song!

And let the young lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound!

We, in thought, will join your throng, Ye that pipe and ye that play,

Ye that through your hearts to-day

Feel the gladness of the May!

What though the radiance which was once so bright Be now for ever taken from my sight,

Though nothing can bring back the hour Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower; We will grieve not, rather find

Strength in what remains behind;

In the primal sympathy

Which having been must ever be;

In the soothing thoughts that spring

Out of human suffering;

In the faith that looks through death, In years that bring the philosophic mind.


Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might; I only have relinquish'd one delight

To live beneath your more habitual sway; I love the brooks which down their channels fret Even more than when I tripp'd lightly as they; The innocent brightness of a new-born day





Is lovely yet;

The clouds that gather round the setting sun Do take a sober colouring from an eye That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality; Another race hath been, and other palms are won.

Thanks to the human heart by which we live, Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears, To me the meanest flower that blows can give Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

William Wordsworth





Ode to Duty

STERN Daughter of the Voice of God!

O Duty! if that name thou love,

Who art a light to guide, a rod

To check the erring and reprove;

Thou, who art victory and law

When empty terrors overawe;

From vain temptations dost set free;

And calm'st the weary strife of frail humanity!

There are who ask not if thine eye

Be on them; who, in love and truth,

Where no misgiving is, rely

Upon the genial sense of youth:

Glad hearts! without reproach or blot; Who do thy work, and know it not:

O, if through confidence misplaced

They fail, thy saving arms, dread Power! around them cast.

Serene will be our days and bright,

And happy will our nature be,

When love is an unerring light,

And joy its own security.

And they a blissful course may hold

Even now, who, not unwisely bold,

Live in the spirit of this creed;

Yet seek thy firm support, according to their need.

I, loving freedom, and untried;

No sport of every random gust,

Yet being to myself a guide,

Too blindly have reposed my trust:

And oft, when in my heart was heard

Thy timely mandate, I deferr'd

The task, in smoother walks to stray; But thee I now would serve more strictly, if I may.

Through no disturbance of my soul,

Or strong compunction in me wrought,

I supplicate for thy control;

But in the quietness of thought.

Me this uncharter'd freedom tires;

I feel the weight of chance-desires;

My hopes no more must change their name, I long for a repose that ever is the same.

Yet not the less would I throughout

Still act according to the voice

Of my own wish; and feel past doubt

That my submissiveness was choice:

Not seeking in the school of pride

For 'precepts over dignified,'

Denial and restraint I prize





No farther than they breed a second Will more wise.

Stern Lawgiver! yet thou dost wear

The Godhead's most benignant grace;

Nor know we anything so fair

As is the smile upon thy face:

Flowers laugh before thee on their beds, And fragrance in thy footing treads;

Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong; And the most ancient heavens, through Thee, are fresh and strong.

To humbler functions, awful Power!

I call thee: I myself commend

Unto thy guidance from this hour;

O, let my weakness have an end!

Give unto me, made lowly wise,

The spirit of self-sacrifice;

The confidence of reason give;

And in the light of truth thy bondman let me live!

William Wordsworth





Ode, Composed On A May Morning

While from the purpling east departs

The star that led the dawn,

Blithe Flora from her couch upstarts, For May is on the lawn.

A quickening hope, a freshening glee, Foreran the expected Power,

Whose first-drawn breath, from bush and tree, Shakes off that pearly shower.

All Nature welcomes Her whose sway

Tempers the year's extremes;

Who scattereth lustres o'er noon-day, Like morning's dewy gleams;

While mellow warble, sprightly trill, The tremulous heart excite;

And hums the balmy air to still

The balance of delight.

Time was, blest Power! when youth and maids At peep of dawn would rise,

And wander forth, in forest glades

Thy birth to solemnize.

Though mute the song---to grace the rite Untouched the hawthorn bough,

Thy Spirit triumphs o'er the slight;

Man changes, but not Thou!

Thy feathered Lieges bill and wings

In love's disport employ;

Warmed by thy influence, creeping things Awake to silent joy:

Queen art thou still for each gay plant Where the slim wild deer roves;

And served in depths where fishes haunt Their own mysterious groves.

Cloud-piercing peak, and trackless heath, Instinctive homage pay;

Nor wants the dim-lit cave a wreath

To honor thee, sweet May!

Where cities fanned by thy brisk airs Behold a smokeless sky,

Their puniest flower-pot-nursling dares To open a bright eye.

And if, on this thy natal morn,

The pole, from which thy name

Hath not departed, stands forlorn

Of song and dance and game;

Still from the village-green a vow

Aspires to thee addrest,

Wherever peace is on the brow,





Or love within the breast.

Yes! where Love nestles thou canst teach The soul to love the more;

Hearts also shall thy lessons reach

That never loved before.

Stript is the haughty one of pride,

The bashful freed from fear,

While rising, like the ocean-tide,

In flow the joyous year.

Hush, feeble lyre! weak words refuse

The service to prolong!

To yon exulting thrush the Muse

Entrusts the imperfect song;

His voice shall chant, in accents clear, Throughout the live-long day,

Till the first silver star appear,

The sovereignty of May.

William Wordsworth





Ode, Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood THERE was a time when meadow, grove, and stream, The earth, and every common sight,

To me did seem

Apparell'd in celestial light,

The glory and the freshness of a dream.

It is not now as it hath been of yore;--

Turn wheresoe'er I may,

By night or day,

The things which I have seen I now can see no more.

The rainbow comes and goes,

And lovely is the rose;

The moon doth with delight

Look round her when the heavens are bare; Waters on a starry night

Are beautiful and fair;

The sunshine is a glorious birth;

But yet I know, where'er I go,

That there hath pass'd away a glory from the earth.

Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song, And while the young lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound,

To me alone there came a thought of grief: A timely utterance gave that thought relief, And I again am strong:

The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep; No more shall grief of mine the season wrong; I hear the echoes through the mountains throng, The winds come to me from the fields of sleep, And all the earth is gay;

Land and sea

Give themselves up to jollity,

And with the heart of May

Doth every beast keep holiday;--

Thou Child of Joy,

Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy Shepherd-boy!

Ye blessed creatures, I have heard the call Ye to each other make; I see

The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee; My heart is at your festival,

My head hath its coronal,

The fulness of your bliss, I feel--I feel it all.

O evil day! if I were sullen

While Earth herself is adorning,

This sweet May-morning,

And the children are culling

On every side,

In a thousand valleys far and wide,

Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm,





And the babe leaps up on his mother's arm:--

I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!

--But there's a tree, of many, one,

A single field which I have look'd upon, Both of them speak of something that is gone: The pansy at my feet

Doth the same tale repeat:

Whither is fled the visionary gleam?

Where is it now, the glory and the dream?

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting,

And cometh from afar:

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness,

But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home:

Heaven lies about us in our infancy!

Shades of the prison-house begin to close Upon the growing Boy,

But he beholds the light, and whence it flows, He sees it in his joy;

The Youth, who daily farther from the east Must travel, still is Nature's priest, And by the vision splendid

Is on his way attended;

At length the Man perceives it die away, And fade into the light of common day.

Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own; Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind, And, even with something of a mother's mind, And no unworthy aim,

The homely nurse doth all she can

To make her foster-child, her Inmate Man, Forget the glories he hath known,

And that imperial palace whence he came.

Behold the Child among his new-born blisses, A six years' darling of a pigmy size!

See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies, Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses, With light upon him from his father's eyes!

See, at his feet, some little plan or chart, Some fragment from his dream of human life, Shaped by himself with newly-learned art; A wedding or a festival,

A mourning or a funeral;

And this hath now his heart,

And unto this he frames his song:

Then will he fit his tongue





To dialogues of business, love, or strife; But it will not be long

Ere this be thrown aside,

And with new joy and pride

The little actor cons another part;

Filling from time to time his 'humorous stage'

With all the Persons, down to palsied Age, That Life brings with her in her equipage; As if his whole vocation

Were endless imitation.

Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie Thy soul's immensity;

Thou best philosopher, who yet dost keep Thy heritage, thou eye among the blind, That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep, Haunted for ever by the eternal mind,--

Mighty prophet! Seer blest!

On whom those truths do rest,

Which we are toiling all our lives to find, In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave; Thou, over whom thy Immortality

Broods like the Day, a master o'er a slave, A presence which is not to be put by; To whom the grave

Is but a lonely bed without the sense or sight Of day or the warm light,

A place of thought where we in waiting lie; Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height, Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke The years to bring the inevitable yoke, Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?

Full soon thy soul shall have her earthly freight, And custom lie upon thee with a weight, Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!

O joy! that in our embers

Is something that doth live,

That nature yet remembers

What was so fugitive!

The thought of our past years in me doth breed Perpetual benediction: not indeed

For that which is most worthy to be blest--

Delight and liberty, the simple creed Of childhood, whether busy or at rest, With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--

Not for these I raise

The song of thanks and praise;

But for those obstinate questionings

Of sense and outward things,

Fallings from us, vanishings;





Blank misgivings of a Creature

Moving about in worlds not realized,

High instincts before which our mortal Nature Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised: But for those first affections,

Those shadowy recollections,

Which, be they what they may,

Are yet the fountain-light of all our day, Are yet a master-light of all our seeing; Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make Our noisy years seem moments in the being Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake, To perish never:

Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour, Nor Man nor Boy,

Nor all that is at enmity with joy,

Can utterly abolish or destroy!

Hence in a season of calm weather

Though inland far we be,

Our souls have sight of that immortal sea Which brought us hither,

Can in a moment travel thither,

And see the children sport upon the shore, And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.

Then sing, ye birds, sing, sing a joyous song!

And let the young lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound!

We in thought will join your throng,

Ye that pipe and ye that play,

Ye that through your hearts to-day

Feel the gladness of the May!

What though the radiance which was once so bright Be now for ever taken from my sight,

Though nothing can bring back the hour Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower; We will grieve not, rather find

Strength in what remains behind;

In the primal sympathy

Which having been must ever be;

In the soothing thoughts that spring

Out of human suffering;

In the faith that looks through death, In years that bring the philosophic mind.

And O ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves, Forebode not any severing of our loves!

Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might; I only have relinquish'd one delight

To live beneath your more habitual sway.

I love the brooks which down their channels fret, Even more than when I tripp'd lightly as they;





The innocent brightness of a new-born Day Is lovely yet;

The clouds that gather round the setting sun Do take a sober colouring from an eye That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality; Another race hath been, and other palms are won.

Thanks to the human heart by which we live, Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears, To me the meanest flower that blows can give Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

William Wordsworth





Ode, On Intimations Of Immortality

I

There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream, The earth, and every common sight,

To me did seem

Apparelled in celestial light,

The glory and the freshness of a dream.

It is not now as it hath been of yore;--

Turn wheresoe'er I may,

By night or day,

The things which I have seen I now can see no more.

II

The Rainbow comes and goes,

And lovely is the Rose,

The Moon doth with delight

Look round her when the heavens are bare, Waters on a starry night

Are beautiful and fair;

The sunshine is a glorious birth;

But yet I know, where'er I go,

That there hath past away a glory from the earth.

III

Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song, And while the young lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound,

To me alone there came a thought of grief: A timely utterance gave that thought relief, And I again am strong:

The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep; No more shall grief of mine the season wrong; I hear the Echoes through the mountains throng, The Winds come to me from the fields of sleep, And all the earth is gay;

Land and sea

Give themselves up to jollity,

And with the heart of May

Doth every Beast keep holiday;--

Thou Child of Joy,

Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy Shepherd-boy!

IV

Ye blessed Creatures, I have heard the call Ye to each other make; I see

The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee; My heart is at your festival,

My head hath its coronal,





The fulness of your bliss, I feel--I feel it all.

Oh evil day! if I were sullen

While Earth herself is adorning,

This sweet May-morning,

And the Children are culling

On every side,

In a thousand valleys far and wide,

Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm, And the Babe leaps up on his Mother's arm:--

I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!

--But there's a Tree, of many, one,

A single Field which I have looked upon, Both of them speak of something that is gone: The Pansy at my feet

Doth the same tale repeat:

Whither is fled the visionary gleam?

Where is it now, the glory and the dream?

V

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting,

And cometh from afar:

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness,

But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home:

Heaven lies about us in our infancy!

Shades of the prison-house begin to close Upon the growing Boy,

But He beholds the light, and whence it flows, He sees it in his joy;

The Youth, who daily farther from the east Must travel, still is Nature's Priest, And by the vision splendid

Is on his way attended;

At length the Man perceives it die away, And fade into the light of common day.

VI

Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own; Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind, And, even with something of a Mother's mind, And no unworthy aim,

The homely Nurse doth all she can

To make her Foster-child, her Inmate Man, Forget the glories he hath known,

And that imperial palace whence he came.

VII





Behold the Child among his new-born blisses, A six years' Darling of a pigmy size!

See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies, Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses, With light upon him from his father's eyes!

See, at his feet, some little plan or chart, Some fragment from his dream of human life, Shaped by himself with newly-learned art; A wedding or a festival,

A mourning or a funeral;

And this hath now his heart,

And unto this he frames his song:

Then will he fit his tongue

To dialogues of business, love, or strife; But it will not be long

Ere this be thrown aside,

And with new joy and pride

The little Actor cons another part;

Filling from time to time his "humorous stage"

With all the Persons, down to palsied Age, That Life brings with her in her equipage; As if his whole vocation

Were endless imitation.

VIII

Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie Thy Soul's immensity;

Thou best Philosopher, who yet dost keep Thy heritage, thou Eye among the blind, That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep, Haunted for ever by the eternal mind,--

Mighty Prophet! Seer blest!

On whom those truths do rest,

Which we are toiling all our lives to find, In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave; Thou, over whom thy Immortality

Broods like the Day, a Master o'er a Slave, A Presence which is not to be put by; Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height, Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke The years to bring the inevitable yoke, Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?

Full soon thy Soul shall have her earthly freight, And custom lie upon thee with a weight Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!

IX

O joy! that in our embers





Is something that doth live,

That nature yet remembers

What was so fugitive!

The thought of our past years in me doth breed Perpetual benediction: not indeed

For that which is most worthy to be blest--

Delight and liberty, the simple creed Of Childhood, whether busy or at rest, With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--

Not for these I raise

The song of thanks and praise;

But for those obstinate questionings

Of sense and outward things,

Fallings from us, vanishings;

Blank misgivings of a Creature

Moving about in worlds not realised,

High instincts before which our mortal Nature Did tremble like a guilty Thing surprised: But for those first affections,

Those shadowy recollections,

Which, be they what they may,

Are yet the fountain light of all our day, Are yet a master light of all our seeing; Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make Our noisy years seem moments in the being Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake, To perish never;

Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour, Nor Man nor Boy,

Nor all that is at enmity with joy,

Can utterly abolish or destroy!

Hence in a season of calm weather

Though inland far we be,

Our Souls have sight of that immortal sea Which brought us hither,

Can in a moment travel thither,

And see the Children sport upon the shore, And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.

X

Then sing, ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song!

And let the young Lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound!

We in thought will join your throng,

Ye that pipe and ye that play,

Ye that through your hearts to-day

Feel the gladness of the May!

What though the radiance which was once so bright Be now for ever taken from my sight,

Though nothing can bring back the hour Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower;





We will grieve not, rather find

Strength in what remains behind;

In the primal sympathy

Which having been must ever be;

In the soothing thoughts that spring

Out of human suffering;

In the faith that looks through death, In years that bring the philosophic mind.

XI

And O, ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves, Forebode not any severing of our loves!

Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might; I only have relinquished one delight

To live beneath your more habitual sway.

I love the Brooks which down their channels fret, Even more than when I tripped lightly as they; The innocent brightness of a new-born Day Is lovely yet;

The Clouds that gather round the setting sun Do take a sober colouring from an eye That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality; Another race hath been, and other palms are won.

Thanks to the human heart by which we live, Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears, To me the meanest flower that blows can give Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

William Wordsworth





Ode: Intimations of Immortality

I

There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream, The earth, and every common sight,

To me did seem

Apparelled in celestial light,

The glory and the freshness of a dream.

It is not now as it hath been of yore;--

Turn wheresoe'er I may,

By night or day,

The things which I have seen I now can see no more.

II

The Rainbow comes and goes,

And lovely is the Rose,

The Moon doth with delight

Look round her when the heavens are bare, Waters on a starry night

Are beautiful and fair;

The sunshine is a glorious birth;

But yet I know, where'er I go,

That there hath past away a glory from the earth.

III

Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song, And while the young lambs bound

As to the tabor's sound,

To me alone there came a thought of grief: A timely utterance gave that thought relief, And I again am strong:

The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep; No more shall grief of mine the season wrong; I hear the Echoes through the mountains throng, The Winds come to me from the fields of sleep, And all the earth is gay;

Land and sea

Give themselves up to jollity,

And with the heart of May

Doth every Beast keep holiday;--

Thou Child of Joy,

Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy Shepherd-boy!

IV

Ye blessed Creatures, I have heard the call Ye to each other make; I see





The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee; My heart is at your festival,

My head hath its coronal,

The fulness of your bliss, I feel--I feel it all.

Oh evil day! if I were sullen

While Earth herself is adorning,

This sweet May-morning,

And the Children are culling

On every side,

In a thousand valleys far and wide,

Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm, And the Babe leaps up on his Mother's arm:--

I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!

--But there's a Tree, of many, one,

A single Field which I have looked upon, Both of them speak of something that is gone: The Pansy at my feet

Doth the same tale repeat:

Whither is fled the visionary gleam?

Where is it now, the glory and the dream?

V

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting,

And cometh from afar:

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness,

But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home:

Heaven lies about us in our infancy!

Shades of the prison-house begin to close Upon the growing Boy,

But He beholds the light, and whence it flows, He sees it in his joy;

The Youth, who daily farther from the east Must travel, still is Nature's Priest, And by the vision splendid

Is on his way attended;

At length the Man perceives it die away, And fade into the light of common day.

VI

Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own; Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind, And, even with something of a Mother's mind, And no unworthy aim,

The homely Nurse doth all she can





To make her Foster-child, her Inmate Man, Forget the glories he hath known,

And that imperial palace whence he came.

VII

Behold the Child among his new-born blisses, A six years' Darling of a pigmy size!

See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies, Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses, With light upon him from his father's eyes!

See, at his feet, some little plan or chart, Some fragment from his dream of human life, Shaped by himself with newly-learned art; A wedding or a festival,

A mourning or a funeral;

And this hath now his heart,

And unto this he frames his song:

Then will he fit his tongue

To dialogues of business, love, or strife; But it will not be long

Ere this be thrown aside,

And with new joy and pride

The little Actor cons another part;

Filling from time to time his "humorous stage"

With all the Persons, down to palsied Age, That Life brings with her in her equipage; As if his whole vocation

Were endless imitation.

VIII

Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie Thy Soul's immensity;

Thou best Philosopher, who yet dost keep Thy heritage, thou Eye among the blind, That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep, Haunted for ever by the eternal mind,--

Mighty Prophet! Seer blest!

On whom those truths do rest,

Which we are toiling all our lives to find, In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave; Thou, over whom thy Immortality

Broods like the Day, a Master o'er a Slave, A Presence which is not to be put by; Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height, Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke The years to bring the inevitable yoke, Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?





Full soon thy Soul shall have her earthly freight, And custom lie upon thee with a weight Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!

IX

O joy! that in our embers

Is something that doth live,

That nature yet remembers

What was so fugitive!

The thought of our past years in me doth breed Perpetual benediction: not indeed

For that which is most worthy to be blest--

Delight and liberty, the simple creed Of Childhood, whether busy or at rest, With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--

Not for these I raise

The song of thanks and praise;

But for those obstinate questionings

Of sense and outward things,

Fallings from us, vanishings;

Blank misgivings of a Creature

Moving about in worlds not realised,

High instincts before which our mortal Nature Did tremble like a guilty Thing surprised: But for those first affections,

Those shadowy recollections,

Which, be they what they may,

Are yet the fountain light of all our day, Are yet a master light of all our seeing; Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make Our noisy years seem moments in the being Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake, To perish never;

Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour, Nor Man nor Boy,

Nor all that is at enmity with joy,

Can utterly abolish or destroy!

Hence in a season of calm weather

Though inland far we be,

Our Souls have sight of that immortal sea Which brought us hither,

Can in a moment travel thither,

And see the Children sport upon the shore, And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.

X

Then sing, ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song!

And let the young Lambs bound





As to the tabor's sound!

We in thought will join your throng,

Ye that pipe and ye that play,

Ye that through your hearts to-day

Feel the gladness of the May!

What though the radiance which was once so bright Be now for ever taken from my sight,

Though nothing can bring back the hour Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower; We will grieve not, rather find

Strength in what remains behind;

In the primal sympathy

Which having been must ever be;

In the soothing thoughts that spring

Out of human suffering;

In the faith that looks through death, In years that bring the philosophic mind.

XI

And O, ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves, Forebode not any severing of our loves!

Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might; I only have relinquished one delight

To live beneath your more habitual sway.

I love the Brooks which down their channels fret, Even more than when I tripped lightly as they; The innocent brightness of a new-born Day Is lovely yet;

The Clouds that gather round the setting sun Do take a sober colouring from an eye That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality; Another race hath been, and other palms are won.

Thanks to the human heart by which we live, Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears, To me the meanest flower that blows can give Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.

William Wordsworth





Old Cumberland Beggar, The

I saw an aged Beggar in my walk;

And he was seated, by the highway side, On a low structure of rude masonry

Built at the foot of a huge hill, that they Who lead their horses down the steep rough road May thence remount at ease. The aged Man Had placed his staff across the broad smooth stone That overlays the pile; and, from a bag All white with flour, the dole of village dames, He drew his scraps and fragments, one by one; And scanned them with a fixed and serious look Of idle computation. In the sun,

Upon the second step of that small pile, Surrounded by those wild unpeopled hills, He sat, and ate his food in solitude: And ever, scattered from his palsied hand, That, still attempting to prevent the waste, Was baffled still, the crumbs in little showers Fell on the ground; and the small mountain birds, Not venturing yet to peck their destined meal, Approached within the length of half his staff.

Him from my childhood have I known; and then He was so old, he seems not older now; He travels on, a solitary Man,

So helpless in appearance, that for him The sauntering Horseman throws not with a slack And careless hand his alms upon the ground, But stops,--that he may safely lodge the coin Within the old Man's hat; nor quits him so, But still, when he has given his horse the rein, Watches the aged Beggar with a look

Sidelong, and half-reverted. She who tends The toll-gate, when in summer at her door She turns her wheel, if on the road she sees The aged beggar coming, quits her work, And lifts the latch for him that he may pass.

The post-boy, when his rattling wheels o'ertake The aged Beggar in the woody lane,

Shouts to him from behind; and if, thus warned, The old man does not change his course, the boy Turns with less noisy wheels to the roadside, And passes gently by, without a curse Upon his lips, or anger at his heart.

He travels on, a solitary Man;

His age has no companion. On the ground His eyes are turned, and, as he moves along

'They' move along the ground; and, evermore, Instead of common and habitual sight

Of fields with rural works, of hill and dale, And the blue sky, one little span of earth Is all his prospect. Thus, from day to day, Bow-bent, his eyes for ever on the ground,





He plies his weary journey; seeing still, And seldom knowing that he sees, some straw, Some scattered leaf, or marks which, in one track, The nails of cart or chariot-wheel have left Impressed on the white road,--in the same line, At distance still the same. Poor Traveller!

His staff trails with him; scarcely do his feet Disturb the summer dust; he is so still In look and motion, that the cottage curs, Ere he has passed the door, will turn away, Weary of barking at him. Boys and girls, The vacant and the busy, maids and youths, And urchins newly breeched--all pass him by: Him even the slow-paced waggon leaves behind.

But deem not this Man useless.--Statesmen! ye Who are so restless in your wisdom, ye Who have a broom still ready in your hands To rid the world of nuisances; ye proud, Heart-swoln, while in your pride ye contemplate Your talents, power, or wisdom, deem him not A burthen of the earth! 'Tis Nature's law That none, the meanest of created things, Or forms created the most vile and brute, The dullest or most noxious, should exist Divorced from good--a spirit and pulse of good, A life and soul, to every mode of being Inseparably linked. Then be assured

That least of all can aught--that ever owned The heaven-regarding eye and front sublime Which man is born to--sink, howe'er depressed, So low as to be scorned without a sin; Without offence to God cast out of view; Like the dry remnant of a garden-flower Whose seeds are shed, or as an implement Worn out and worthless. While from door to door, This old Man creeps, the villagers in him Behold a record which together binds

Past deeds and offices of charity,

Else unremembered, and so keeps alive The kindly mood in hearts which lapse of years, And that half-wisdom half-experience gives, Make slow to feel, and by sure steps resign To selfishness and cold oblivious cares.

Among the farms and solitary huts,

Hamlets and thinly-scattered villages, Where'er the aged Beggar takes his rounds, The mild necessity of use compels


Of reason; yet prepares that after-joy Which reason cherishes. And thus the soul, By that sweet taste of pleasure unpursued, Doth find herself insensibly disposed





To virtue and true goodness.

Some there are,

By their good works exalted, lofty minds And meditative, authors of delight

And happiness, which to the end of time Will live, and spread, and kindle: even such minds In childhood, from this solitary Being, Or from like wanderer, haply have received (A thing more precious far than all that books Or the solicitudes of love can do!)

That first mild touch of sympathy and thought, In which they found their kindred with a world Where want and sorrow were. The easy man Who sits at his own door,--and, like the pear That overhangs his head from the green wall, Feeds in the sunshine; the robust and young, The prosperous and unthinking, they who live Sheltered, and flourish in a little grove Of their own kindred;--all behold in him A silent monitor, which on their minds Must needs impress a transitory thought Of self-congratulation, to the heart

Of each recalling his peculiar boons, His charters and exemptions; and, perchance, Though he to no one give the fortitude And circumspection needful to preserve His present blessings, and to husband up The respite of the season, he, at least, And 'tis no vulgar service, makes them felt.

Yet further.----Many, I believe, there are Who live a life of virtuous decency,

Men who can hear the Decalogue and feel No self-reproach; who of the moral law Established in the land where they abide Are strict observers; and not negligent In acts of love to those with whom they dwell, Their kindred, and the children of their blood.

Praise be to such, and to their slumbers peace!

--But of the poor man ask, the abject poor; Go, and demand of him, if there be here In this cold abstinence from evil deeds, And these inevitable charities,

Wherewith to satisfy the human soul?

No--man is dear to man; the poorest poor Long for some moments in a weary life When they can know and feel that they have been, Themselves, the fathers and the dealers-out Of some small blessings; have been kind to such As needed kindness, for this single cause, That we have all of us one human heart.

--Such pleasure is to one kind Being known, My neighbour, when with punctual care, each week





Duly as Friday comes, though pressed herself By her own wants, she from her store of meal Takes one unsparing handful for the scrip Of this old Mendicant, and, from her door Returning with exhilarated heart,

Sits by her fire, and builds her hope in heaven.

Then let him pass, a blessing on his head!

And while in that vast solitude to which The tide of things has borne him, he appears To breathe and live but for himself alone, Unblamed, uninjured, let him bear about The good which the benignant law of Heaven Has hung around him: and, while life is his, Still let him prompt the unlettered villagers To tender offices and pensive thoughts.

--Then let him pass, a blessing on his head!

And, long as he can wander, let him breathe The freshness of the valleys; let his blood Struggle with frosty air and winter snows; And let the chartered wind that sweeps the heath Beat his grey locks against his withered face.

Reverence the hope whose vital anxiousness Gives the last human interest to his heart.

May never HOUSE, misnamed of INDUSTRY, Make him a captive!--for that pent-up din, Those life-consuming sounds that clog the air, Be his the natural silence of old age!

Let him be free of mountain solitudes; And have around him, whether heard or not, The pleasant melody of woodland birds.

Few are his pleasures: if his eyes have now Been doomed so long to settle upon earth That not without some effort they behold The countenance of the horizontal sun, Rising or setting, let the light at least Find a free entrance to their languid orbs.

And let him, 'where' and 'when' he will, sit down Beneath the trees, or on a grassy bank Of highway side, and with the little birds Share his chance-gathered meal; and, finally, As in the eye of Nature he has lived, So in the eye of Nature let him die!

William Wordsworth





On the Departure of Sir Walter Scott from Abbotsford

. A trouble, not of clouds, or weeping rain, Nor of the setting sun's pathetic light Engendered, hangs o'er Eildon's triple height: Spirits of Power, assembled there, complain For kindred Power departing from their sight; While Tweed, best pleased in chanting a blithe strain, Saddens his voice again, and yet again.

Lift up your hearts, ye Mourners! for the might Of the whole world's good wishes with him goes; Blessings and prayers in nobler retinue Than sceptred king or laurelled conqueror knows, Follow this wondrous Potentate. Be true, Ye winds of ocean, and the midland sea, Wafting your Charge to soft Parthenope!

William Wordsworth





On the Extinction of the Venetian Republic ONCE did she hold the gorgeous East in fee; And was the safeguard of the West: the worth Of Venice did not fall below her birth, Venice, the eldest Child of Liberty.

She was a maiden City, bright and free; No guile seduced, no force could violate; And, when she took unto herself a mate, She must espouse the everlasting Sea.

And what if she had seen those glories fade, Those titles vanish, and that strength decay; Yet shall some tribute of regret be paid When her long life hath reach'd its final day: Men are we, and must grieve when even the Shade Of that which once was great is pass'd away.

William Wordsworth





Perfect Woman

SHE was a phantom of delight

When first she gleam'd upon my sight; A lovely apparition, sent

To be a moment's ornament;

Her eyes as stars of twilight fair;

Like twilight's, too, her dusky hair; But all things else about her drawn

From May-time and the cheerful dawn;

A dancing shape, an image gay,

To haunt, to startle, and waylay.

I saw her upon nearer view,

A Spirit, yet a Woman too!

Her household motions light and free, And steps of virgin liberty;

A countenance in which did meet

Sweet records, promises as sweet;

A creature not too bright or good

For human nature's daily food;

For transient sorrows, simple wiles,

Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles.

And now I see with eye serene

The very pulse of the machine;

A being breathing thoughtful breath,

A traveller between life and death;

The reason firm, the temperate will,

Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill; A perfect Woman, nobly plann'd,

To warn, to comfort, and command;

And yet a Spirit still, and bright

With something of angelic light.

William Wordsworth





Peter Bell, A Tale

PROLOGUE

There's something in a flying horse,

There's something in a huge balloon;

But through the clouds I'll never float Until I have a little Boat,

Shaped like the crescent-moon.

And now I 'have' a little Boat,

In shape a very crescent-moon

Fast through the clouds my boat can sail; But if perchance your faith should fail, Look up--and you shall see me soon!

The woods, my Friends, are round you roaring, Rocking and roaring like a sea;

The noise of danger's in your ears,

And ye have all a thousand fears

Both for my little Boat and me!

Meanwhile untroubled I admire

The pointed horns of my canoe;

And, did not pity touch my breast,

To see how ye are all distrest,

Till my ribs ached, I'd laugh at you!

Away we go, my Boat and I--

Frail man ne'er sate in such another; Whether among the winds we strive,

Or deep into the clouds we dive,

Each is contented with the other.

Away we go--and what care we

For treasons, tumults, and for wars?

We are as calm in our delight

As is the crescent-moon so bright

Among the scattered stars.

Up goes my Boat among the stars

Through many a breathless field of light, Through many a long blue field of ether, Leaving ten thousand stars beneath her: Up goes my little Boat so bright!

The Crab, the Scorpion, and the Bull--

We pry among them all; have shot

High o'er the red-haired race of Mars, Covered from top to toe with scars;

Such company I like it not!

The towns in Saturn are decayed,

And melancholy Spectres throng them;--





The Pleiads, that appear to kiss

Each other in the vast abyss,

With joy I sail among them.

Swift Mercury resounds with mirth,

Great Jove is full of stately bowers; But these, and all that they contain, What are they to that tiny grain,

That little Earth of ours?

Then back to Earth, the dear green Earth:--

Whole ages if I here should roam,

The world for my remarks and me

Would not a whit the better be;

I've left my heart at home.

See! there she is, the matchless Earth!

There spreads the famed Pacific Ocean!

Old Andes thrusts yon craggy spear

Through the grey clouds; the Alps are here, Like waters in commotion!

Yon tawny slip is Libya's sands;

That silver thread the river Dnieper!

And look, where clothed in brightest green Is a sweet Isle, of isles the Queen;

Ye fairies, from all evil keep her!

And see the town where I was born!

Around those happy fields we span

In boyish gambols;--I was lost

Where I have been, but on this coast

I feel I am a man.

Never did fifty things at once

Appear so lovely, never, never;--

How tunefully the forests ring!

To hear the earth's soft murmuring

Thus could I hang for ever!

"Shame on you!" cried my little Boat,

"Was ever such a homesick Loon,

Within a living Boat to sit,

And make no better use of it;

A Boat twin-sister of the crescent-moon!

"Ne'er in the breast of full-grown Poet Fluttered so faint a heart before;--

Was it the music of the spheres

That overpowered your mortal ears?

--Such din shall trouble them no more.





"These nether precincts do not lack Charms of their own;--then come with me; I want a comrade, and for you

There's nothing that I would not do;

Nought is there that you shall not see.

"Haste! and above Siberian snows We'll sport amid the boreal morning;

Will mingle with her lustres gliding

Among the stars, the stars now hiding, And now the stars adorning.

"I know the secrets of a land

Where human foot did never stray;

Fair is that land as evening skies,


"Or we'll into the realm of Faery, Among the lovely shades of things;

The shadowy forms of mountains bare,

And streams, and bowers, and ladies fair, The shades of palaces and kings!

"Or, if you thirst with hardy zeal Less quiet regions to explore,

Prompt voyage shall to you reveal

How earth and heaven are taught to feel The might of magic lore!"

"My little vagrant Form of light, My gay and beautiful Canoe,

Well have you played your friendly part; As kindly take what from my heart

Experience forces--then adieu!

"Temptation lurks among your words; But, while these pleasures you're pursuing Without impediment or let,

No wonder if you quite forget

What on the earth is doing.

"There was a time when all mankind Did listen with a faith sincere

To tuneful tongues in mystery versed;

'Then' Poets fearlessly rehearsed

The wonders of a wild career.

"Go--(but the world's a sleepy world, And 'tis, I fear, an age too late)

Take with you some ambitious Youth!

For, restless Wanderer! I, in truth,





Am all unfit to be your mate.

"Long have I loved what I behold, The night that calms, the day that cheers; The common growth of mother-earth

Suffices me--her tears, her mirth,

Her humblest mirth and tears.

"The dragon's wing, the magic ring, I shall not covet for my dower,

If I along that lowly way

With sympathetic heart may stray,

And with a soul of power.

"These given, what more need I desire To stir, to soothe, or elevate?

What nobler marvels than the mind

May in life's daily prospect find,

May find or there create?

"A potent wand doth Sorrow wield; What spell so strong as guilty Fear!

Repentance is a tender Sprite;

If aught on earth have heavenly might,

'Tis lodged within her silent tear.

"But grant my wishes,--let us now Descend from this ethereal height;

Then take thy way, adventurous Skiff, More daring far than Hippogriff,

And be thy own delight!

"To the stone-table in my garden, Loved haunt of many a summer hour,

The Squire is come: his daughter Bess Beside him in the cool recess

Sits blooming like a flower.

"With these are many more convened; They know not I have been so far;--

I see them there, in number nine,

Beneath the spreading Weymouth-pine!

I see them--there they are!

"There sits the Vicar and his Dame; And there my good friend, Stephen Otter; And, ere the light of evening fail,

To them I must relate the Tale

Of Peter Bell the Potter."

Off flew the Boat--away she flees,

Spurning her freight with indignation!





And I, as well as I was able,

On two poor legs, toward my stone-table Limped on with sore vexation.

"O, here he is!" cried little Bess--

She saw me at the garden-door;

"We've waited anxiously and long,"

They cried, and all around me throng, Full nine of them or more!

"Reproach me not--your fears be still--

Be thankful we again have met;--

Resume, my Friends! within the shade

Your seats, and quickly shall be paid The well-remembered debt."

I spake with faltering voice, like one Not wholly rescued from the pale

Of a wild dream, or worse illusion;

But, straight, to cover my confusion, Began the promised Tale.

PART FIRST

ALL by the moonlight river side

Groaned the poor Beast--alas! in vain; The staff was raised to loftier height, And the blows fell with heavier weight As Peter struck--and struck again.

"Hold!" cried the Squire, "against the rules Of common sense you're surely sinning; This leap is for us all too bold;

Who Peter was, let that be told,


----"A Potter, Sir, he was by trade,"

Said I, becoming quite collected;

"And wheresoever he appeared,

Full twenty times was Peter feared

For once that Peter was respected.

"He, two-and-thirty years or more, Had been a wild and woodland rover;

Had heard the Atlantic surges roar

On farthest Cornwall's rocky shore,

And trod the cliffs of Dover.

"And he had seen Caernarvon's towers, And well he knew the spire of Sarum;

And he had been where Lincoln bell

Flings o'er the fen that ponderous knell--





A far-renowned alarum!

"At Doncaster, at York, and Leeds, And merry Carlisle had be been;

And all along the Lowlands fair,

All through the bonny shire of Ayr

And far as Aberdeen.

"And he had been at Inverness;

And Peter, by the mountain-rills,

Had danced his round with Highland lasses; And he had lain beside his asses

On lofty Cheviot Hills:

"And he had trudged through Yorkshire dales, Among the rocks and winding 'scars',

Where deep and low the hamlets lie

Beneath their little patch of sky

And little lot of stars:

"And all along the indented coast, Bespattered with the salt-sea foam;

Where'er a knot of houses lay

On headland, or in hollow bay;--

Sure never man like him did roam!

"As well might Peter, in the Fleet, Have been fast bound, a begging debtor;--

He travelled here, he travelled there,--

But not the value of a hair

Was heart or head the better.

"He roved among the vales and streams, In the green wood and hollow dell;

They were his dwellings night and day,--

But nature ne'er could find the way

Into the heart of Peter Bell.

"In vain, through every changeful year, Did Nature lead him as before;

A primrose by a river's brim

A yellow primrose was to him,

And it was nothing more.

"Small change it made on Peter's heart To see his gentle panniered train

With more than vernal pleasure feeding, Where'er the tender grass was leading Its earliest green along the lane.

"In vain, through water, earth, and air, The soul of happy sound was spread,





When Peter on some April morn,

Beneath the broom or budding thorn,

Made the warm earth his lazy bed.

"At noon, when, by the forest's edge He lay beneath the branches high,

The soft blue shy did never melt

Into his heart; he never felt

The witchery of the soft blue sky!

"On a fair prospect some have looked And felt, as I have heard them say,

As if the moving time had been

A thing as steadfast as the scene

On which they gazed themselves away.

"Within the breast of Peter Bell These silent raptures found no place; He was a Carl as wild and rude

As ever hue-and-cry pursued,

As ever ran a felon's race.

"Of all that lead a lawless life, Of all that love their lawless lives, In city or in village small,

He was the wildest far of all;--

He had a dozen wedded wives.

"Nay, start not!--wedded wives--and twelve!

But how one wife could e'er come near him, In simple truth I cannot tell;

For, be it said of Peter Bell

To see him was to fear him.

"Though Nature could not touch his heart By lovely forms, and silent weather,

And tender sounds, yet you might see

At once, that Peter Bell and she

Had often been together.

"A savage wildness round him hung As of a dweller out of doors;

In his whole figure and his mien

A savage character was seen

Of mountains and of dreary moors.

"To all the unshaped half-human thoughts Which solitary Nature feeds

'Mid summer storms or winter's ice,

Had Peter joined whatever vice






"His face was keen as is the wind That cuts along the hawthorn-fence;--

Of courage you saw little there,

But, in its stead, a medley air

Of cunning and of impudence.

"He had a dark and sidelong walk, And long and slouching was his gait;

Beneath his looks so bare and bold,

You might perceive, his spirit cold

Was playing with some inward bait.

"His forehead wrinkled was and furred; A work, one half of which was done

By thinking of his 'whens' and 'hows;'

And half, by knitting of his brows

Beneath the glaring sun.

"There was a hardness in his cheek, There was a hardness in his eye,

As if the man had fixed his face,

In many a solitary place,

Against the wind and open sky!"

ONE NIGHT, (and now my little Bess!

We've reached at last the promised Tale:) One beautiful November night,

When the full moon was shining bright Upon the rapid river Swale,

Along the river's winding banks

Peter was travelling all alone;--

Whether to buy or sell, or led

By pleasure running in his head,

To me was never known.

He trudged along through copse and brake, He trudged along o'er hill and dale;

Nor for the moon cared he a tittle,

And for the stars he cared as little, And for the murmuring river Swale.

But, chancing to espy a path

That promised to cut short the way

As many a wiser man hath done,

He left a trusty guide for one

That might his steps betray.

To a thick wood he soon is brought

Where cheerily his course he weaves,

And whistling loud may yet be heard,

Though often buried, like a bird





Darkling, among the boughs and leaves.

But quickly Peter's mood is changed,

And on he drives with cheeks that burn In downright fury and in wrath;--

There's little sign the treacherous path Will to the road return!

The path grows dim, and dimmer still; Now up, now down, the Rover wends,

With all the sail that he can carry,

Till brought to a deserted quarry--

And there the pathway ends.

He paused--for shadows of strange shape, Massy and black, before him lay;

But through the dark, and through the cold, And through the yawning fissures old, Did Peter boldly press his way

Right through the quarry;--and behold A scene of soft and lovely hue!

Where blue and grey, and tender green, Together make as sweet a scene

As ever human eye did view.

Beneath the clear blue sky he saw

A little field of meadow ground;

But field or meadow name it not;

Call it of earth a small green plot,

With rocks encompassed round,

The Swale flowed under the grey rocks, But he flowed quiet and unseen;--

You need a strong and stormy gale

To bring the noises of the Swale

To that green spot, so calm and green!

And is there no one dwelling here,

No hermit with his beads and glass?

And does no little cottage look

Upon this soft and fertile nook?

Does no one live near this green grass?

Across the deep and quiet spot

Is Peter driving through the grass--

And now has reached the skirting trees; When, turning round his head, he sees A solitary Ass.

"A Prize!" cries Peter--but he first Must spy about him far and near:





There's not a single house in sight,

No woodman's hut, no cottage light--

Peter, you need not fear!

There's nothing to be seen but woods, And rocks that spread a hoary gleam,

And this one Beast, that from the bed Of the green meadow hangs his head

Over the silent stream.

His head is with a halter bound;

The halter seizing, Peter leapt

Upon the Creature's back, and plied

With ready heels his shaggy side;


Then Peter gave a sudden jerk,

A jerk that from a dungeon-floor

Would have pulled up an iron ring;

But still the heavy-headed Thing

Stood just as he had stood before!

Quoth Peter, leaping from his seat,

"There is some plot against me laid;"

Once more the little meadow-ground

And all the hoary cliffs around

He cautiously surveyed,

All, all is silent--rocks and woods,

All still and silent--far and near!

Only the Ass, with motion dull,

Upon the pivot of his skull

Turns round his long left ear.

Thought Peter, What can mean all this?

Some ugly witchcraft must be here!

--Once more the Ass, with motion dull, Upon the pivot of his skull

Turned round his long left ear.

Suspicion ripened into dread;

Yet with deliberate action slow,

His staff high-raising, in the pride

Of skill, upon the sounding hide,

He dealt a sturdy blow.

The poor Ass staggered with the shock; And then, as if to take his ease,

In quiet uncomplaining mood,

Upon the spot where he had stood,

Dropped gently down upon his knees:





As gently on his side he fell;

And by the river's brink did lie;

And, while he lay like one that mourned, The patient Beast on Peter turned

His shining hazel eye.

'Twas but one mild, reproachful look, A look more tender than severe;

And straight in sorrow, not in dread, He turned the eye-ball in his head

Towards the smooth river deep and clear.

Upon the Beast the sapling rings;

His lank sides heaved, his limbs they stirred; He gave a groan, and then another,

Of that which went before the brother, And then he gave a third.

All by the moonlight river side

He gave three miserable groans;

And not till now hath Peter seen

How gaunt the Creature is,--how lean

And sharp his staring bones!

With legs stretched out and stiff he lay:--

No word of kind commiseration

Fell at the sight from Peter's tongue; With hard contempt his heart was wrung, With hatred and vexation.

The meagre beast lay still as death;

And Peter's lips with fury quiver;

Quoth he, "You little mulish dog, I'll fling your carcase like a log

Head-foremost down the river!"

An impious oath confirmed the threat--

Whereat from the earth on which he lay To all the echoes, south and north,

And east and west, the Ass sent forth A long and clamorous bray!

This outcry, on the heart of Peter,

Seems like a note of joy to strike,--

Joy at the heart of Peter knocks;

But in the echo of the rocks

Was something Peter did not like.

Whether to cheer his coward breast,

Or that he could not break the chain, In this serene and solemn hour,

Twined round him by demoniac power,





To the blind work he turned again.

Among the rocks and winding crags;

Among the mountains far away;

Once more the ass did lengthen out

More ruefully a deep-drawn shout,

The hard dry see-saw of his horrible bray!

What is there now in Peter's heart!

Or whence the might of this strange sound?

The moon uneasy looked and dimmer,

The broad blue heavens appeared to glimmer, And the rocks staggered all around--

From Peter's hand the sapling dropped!

Threat has he none to execute;

"If any one should come and see

That I am here, they'll think," quoth he,

"I'm helping this poor dying brute."

He scans the Ass from limb to limb,

And ventures now to uplift his eyes;

More steady looks the moon, and clear More like themselves the rocks appear And touch more quiet skies.

His scorn returns--his hate revives;

He stoops the Ass's neck to seize

With malice--that again takes flight; For in the pool a startling sight


Is it the moon's distorted face?

The ghost-like image of a cloud?

Is it a gallows there portrayed?

Is Peter of himself afraid?

Is it a coffin,--or a shroud?

A grisly idol hewn in stone?

Or imp from witch's lap let fall?

Perhaps a ring of shining fairies?

Such as pursue their feared vagaries

In sylvan bower, or haunted hall?

Is it a fiend that to a stake

Of fire his desperate self is tethering?

Or stubborn spirit doomed to yell

In solitary ward or cell,

Ten thousand miles from all his brethren?

Never did pulse so quickly throb,

And never heart so loudly panted;





He looks, he cannot choose but look;

Like some one reading in a book--

A book that is enchanted.

Ah, well-a-day for Peter Bell!

He will be turned to iron soon,

Meet Statue for the court of Fear!

His hat is up--and every hair

Bristles, and whitens in the moon!

He looks, he ponders, looks again;

He sees a motion--hears a groan;

His eyes will burst--his heart will break--

He gives a loud and frightful shriek, And back he falls, as if his life were flown!

PART SECOND

WE left our Hero in a trance,

Beneath the alders, near the river;

The Ass is by the river-side,

And, where the feeble breezes glide,

Upon the stream the moonbeams quiver.

A happy respite! but at length

He feels the glimmering of the moon;

Wakes with glazed eve. and feebly signing--

To sink, perhaps, where he is lying,

Into a second swoon!

He lifts his head, he sees his staff; He touches--'tis to him a treasure!

Faint recollection seems to tell

That he is yet where mortals dwell--

A thought received with languid pleasure!

His head upon his elbow propped,

Becoming less and less perplexed,

Sky-ward he looks--to rock and wood--

And then--upon the glassy flood

His wandering eye is fixed.

Thought he, that is the face of one

In his last sleep securely bound!

So toward the stream his head he bent, And downward thrust his staff, intent The river's depth to sound.

'Now'--like a tempest-shattered bark, That overwhelmed and prostrate lies,

And in a moment to the verge

Is lifted of a foaming surge--





Full suddenly the Ass doth rise!

His staring bones all shake with joy, And close by Peter's side he stands:

While Peter o'er the river bends,

The little Ass his neck extends,

And fondly licks his hands.

Such life is in the Ass's eyes,

Such life is in his limbs and ears;

That Peter Bell, if he had been

The veriest coward ever seen,

Must now have thrown aside his fears.

The Ass looks on--and to his work

Is Peter quietly resigned;

He touches here--he touches there--

And now among the dead man's hair

His sapling Peter has entwined.

He pulls--and looks--and pulls again; And he whom the poor Ass had lost,

The man who had been four days dead,

Head-foremost from the river's bed

Uprises like a ghost!

And Peter draws him to dry land;

And through the brain of Peter pass

Some poignant twitches, fast and faster,

"No doubt," quoth he, "he is the Master Of this poor miserable Ass!"

The meagre Shadow that looks on--

What would he now? what is he doing?

His sudden fit of joy is flown,--

He on his knees hath laid him down,

As if he were his grief renewing;

But no--that Peter on his back

Must mount, he shows well as he can:

Thought Peter then, come weal or woe, I'll do what he would have me do,

In pity to this poor drowned man.

With that resolve he boldly mounts

Upon the pleased and thankful Ass;

And then, without a moment's stay,

That earnest Creature turned away


Intent upon his faithful watch,

The Beast four days and nights had past;





A sweeter meadow ne'er was seen,

And there the Ass four days had been, Nor ever once did break his fast:

Yet firm his step, and stout his heart; The mead is crossed--the quarry's mouth Is reached; but there the trusty guide Into a thicket turns aside,

And deftly ambles towards the south.

When hark a burst of doleful sound!

And Peter honestly might say,

The like came never to his ears,

Though he has been, full thirty years, A rover--night and day!

'Tis not a plover of the moors,

'Tis not a bittern of the fen;

Nor can it be a barking fox,

Nor night-bird chambered in the rocks, Nor wild-cat in a woody glen!

The Ass is startled--and stops short

Right in the middle of the thicket;

And Peter, wont to whistle loud

Whether alone or in a crowd,

Is silent as a silent cricket.

What ails you now, my little Bess?

Well may you tremble and look grave!

This cry--that rings along the wood,

This cry--that floats adown the flood, Comes from the entrance of a cave:

I see a blooming Wood-boy there,

And if I had the power to say

How sorrowful the wanderer is,

Your heart would be as sad as his

Till you had kissed his tears away!

Grasping a hawthorn branch in hand,

All bright with berries ripe and red, Into the cavern's mouth he peeps;

Thence back into the moonlight creeps; Whom seeks he--whom?--the silent dead: His father!--Him doth he require--

Him hath he sought with fruitless pains, Among the rocks, behind the trees;

Now creeping on his hands and knees,

Now running o'er the open plains.





And hither is he come at last,

When he through such a day has gone,

By this dark cave to be distrest

Like a poor bird--her plundered nest

Hovering around with dolorous moan!

Of that intense and piercing cry

The listening Ass conjectures well;

Wild as it is, he there can read

Some intermingled notes that plead

With touches irresistible.

But Peter--when he saw the Ass

Not only stop but turn, and change

The cherished tenor of his pace

That lamentable cry to chase--

It wrought in him conviction strange; A faith that, for the dead man's sake And this poor slave who loved him well, Vengeance upon his head will fall,

Some visitation worse than all

Which ever till this night befell.

Meanwhile the Ass to reach his home,

Is striving stoutly as he may;

But, while he climbs the woody hill,

The cry grows weak--and weaker still; And now at last it dies away.

So with his freight the Creature turns Into a gloomy grove of beech,

Along the shade with footsteps true

Descending slowly, till the two

The open moonlight reach.

And there, along the narrow dell,

A fair smooth pathway you discern,

A length of green and open road--

As if it from a fountain flowed--

Winding away between the fern.

The rocks that tower on either side

Build up a wild fantastic scene;

Temples like those among the Hindoos, And mosques, and spires, and abbey windows, And castles all with ivy green!

And, while the Ass pursues his way,

Along this solitary dell,

As pensively his steps advance,

The mosques and spires change countenance





And look at Peter Bell!

That unintelligible cry

Hath left him high in preparation,--

Convinced that he, or soon or late,

This very night will meet his fate--

And so he sits in expectation!

The strenuous Animal hath clomb

With the green path; and now he wends Where, shining like the smoothest sea, In undisturbed immensity


But whence this faintly-rustling sound By which the journeying pair are chased?

--A withered leaf is close behind,

Light plaything for the sportive wind Upon that solitary waste.

When Peter spied the moving thing,

It only doubled his distress;

"Where there is not a bush or tree, The very leaves they follow me--

So huge hath been my wickedness!"

To a close lane they now are come,

Where, as before, the enduring Ass

Moves on without a moment's stop,

Nor once turns round his head to crop A bramble-leaf or blade of grass.

Between the hedges as they go,

The white dust sleeps upon the lane;

And Peter, ever and anon

Back-looking, sees, upon a stone,

Or in the dust, a crimson stain.

A stain--as of a drop of blood

By moonlight made more faint and wan; Ha! why these sinkings of despair?

He knows not how the blood comes there--

And Peter is a wicked man.

At length he spies a bleeding wound,

Where he had struck the Ass's head;

He sees the blood, knows what it is,--

A glimpse of sudden joy was his,

But then it quickly fled;

Of him whom sudden death had seized

He thought,--of thee, O faithful Ass!





And once again those ghastly pains,

Shoot to and fro through heart and reins, And through his brain like lightning pass.

PART THIRD

I'VE heard of one, a gentle Soul,

Though given to sadness and to gloom, And for the fact will vouch,--one night It chanced that by a taper's light

This man was reading in his room;

Bending, as you or I might bend

At night o'er any pious book,

When sudden blackness overspread

The snow-white page on which he read, And made the good man round him look.

The chamber walls were dark all round,--

And to his book he turned again;

--The light had left the lonely taper, And formed itself upon the paper

Into large letters--bright and plain!

The godly book was in his hand--

And, on the page, more black than coal, Appeared, set forth in strange array, A 'word'--which to his dying day

Perplexed the good man's gentle soul.

The ghostly word, thus plainly seen,

Did never from his lips depart;

But he hath said, poor gentle wight!

It brought full many a sin to light

Out of the bottom of his heart.

Dread Spirits! to confound the meek

Why wander from your course so far,

Disordering colour, form, and stature!

--Let good men feel the soul of nature, And see things as they are.

Yet, potent Spirits! well I know,

How ye, that play with soul and sense, Are not unused to trouble friends

Of goodness, for most gracious ends--

And this I speak in reverence!

But might I give advice to you,

Whom in my fear I love so well;

From men of pensive virtue go,

Dread Beings! and your empire show





On hearts like that of Peter Bell.

Your presence often have I felt

In darkness and the stormy night;

And, with like force, if need there be, Ye can put forth your agency

When earth is calm, and heaven is bright.

Then, coming from the wayward world,

That powerful world in which ye dwell, Come, Spirits of the Mind! and try

To-night, beneath the moonlight sky,

What may be done with Peter Bell!

--O, would that some more skilful voice My further labour might prevent!

Kind Listeners, that around me sit,

I feel that I am all unfit

For such high argument.

I've played, I've danced, with my narration; I loitered long ere I began:

Ye waited then on my good pleasure;

Pour out indulgence still, in measure As liberal as ye can!

Our Travellers, ye remember well,

Are thridding a sequestered lane;

And Peter many tricks is trying,

And many anodynes applying,


By this his heart is lighter far;

And, finding that he can account

So snugly for that crimson stain,

His evil spirit up again

Does like an empty bucket mount.

And Peter is a deep logician

Who hath no lack of wit mercurial;

"Blood drops--leaves rustle--yet," quoth he,

"This poor man never, but for me, Could have had Christian burial.

"And, say the best you can, 'tis plain, That here has been some wicked dealing; No doubt the devil in me wrought;

I'm not the man who could have thought An Ass like this was worth the stealing!"

So from his pocket Peter takes

His shining horn tobacco-box;





And, in a light and careless way,

As men who with their purpose play,

Upon the lid he knocks.

Let them whose voice can stop the clouds, Whose cunning eye can see the wind,

Tell to a curious world the cause

Why, making here a sudden pause,

The Ass turned round his head, and 'grinned'.

Appalling process! I have marked

The like on heath, in lonely wood;

And, verily, have seldom met

A spectacle more hideous--yet

It suited Peter's present mood.

And, grinning in his turn, his teeth

He in jocose defiance showed--

When, to upset his spiteful mirth,

A murmur, pent within the earth,

In the dead earth beneath the road

Rolled audibly! it swept along,

A muffled noise--a rumbling sound!--

'Twas by a troop of miners made,

Plying with gunpowder their trade,

Some twenty fathoms under ground.

Small cause of dire effect! for, surely, If ever mortal, King or Cotter,

Believed that earth was charged to quake And yawn for his unworthy sake,

'Twas Peter Bell the Potter.

But, as an oak in breathless air

Will stand though to the centre hewn; Or as the weakest things, if frost

Have stiffened them, maintain their post; So he, beneath the gazing moon!--

The Beast bestriding thus, he reached A spot where, in a sheltering cove,

A little chapel stands alone,

With greenest ivy overgrown,

And tufted with an ivy grove;

Dying insensibly away

From human thoughts and purposes,

It seemed--wall, window, roof and tower--

To bow to some transforming power,

And blend with the surrounding trees.





As ruinous a place it was,

Thought Peter, in the shire of Fife

That served my turn, when following still From land to land a reckless will

I married my sixth wife!

The unheeding Ass moves slowly on,

And now is passing by an inn

Brim-full of a carousing crew,

That make, with curses not a few,

An uproar and a drunken din.

I cannot well express the thoughts

Which Peter in those noises found;--

A stifling power compressed his frame, While-as a swimming darkness came

Over that dull and dreary sound.

For well did Peter know the sound;

The language of those drunken joys

To him, a jovial soul, I ween,

But a few hours ago, had been

A gladsome and a welcome noise.

'Now', turned adrift into the past,

He finds no solace in his course;

Like planet-stricken men of yore,

He trembles, smitten to the core

By strong compunction and remorse.

But, more than all, his heart is stung To think of one, almost a child;

A sweet and playful Highland girl,

As light and beauteous as a squirrel, As beauteous and as wild!

Her dwelling was a lonely house,

A cottage in a heathy dell;

And she put on her gown of green,

And left her mother at sixteen,

And followed Peter Bell.

But many good and pious thoughts

Had she; and, in the kirk to pray,

Two long Scotch miles, through rain or snow To kirk she had been used to go,


And, when she followed Peter Bell,

It was to lead an honest life;

For he, with tongue not used to falter, Had pledged his troth before the altar





To love her as his wedded wife.

A mother's hope is hers;--but soon

She drooped and pined like one forlorn; From Scripture she a name did borrow; Benoni, or the child of sorrow,

She called her babe unborn.

For she had learned how Peter lived,

And took it in most grievous part;

She to the very bone was worn,

And, ere that little child was born,

Died of a broken heart.

And now the Spirits of the Mind

Are busy with poor Peter Bell;

Upon the rights of visual sense

Usurping, with a prevalence

More terrible than magic spell.

Close by a brake of flowering furze

(Above it shivering aspens play)

He sees an unsubstantial creature,

His very self in form and feature,

Not four yards from the broad highway: And stretched beneath the furze he sees The Highland girl--it is no other;

And hears her crying as she cried,

The very moment that she died,

"My mother! oh my mother!"

The sweat pours down from Peter's face, So grievous is his heart's contrition; With agony his eye-balls ache

While he beholds by the furze-brake

This miserable vision!

Calm is the well-deserving brute,

'His' peace hath no offence betrayed; But now, while down that slope he wends, A voice to Peter's ear ascends,

Resounding from the woody glade:

The voice, though clamorous as a horn Re-echoed by a naked rock,

Comes from that tabernacle--List!

Within, a fervent Methodist

Is preaching to no heedless flock!

"Repent! repent!" he cries aloud,

"While yet ye may find mercy;--strive





To love the Lord with all your might; Turn to him, seek him day and night,

And save your souls alive!

"Repent! repent! though ye have gone, Through paths of wickedness and woe,

After the Babylonian harlot;

And, though your sins be red as scarlet, They shall be white as snow!"

Even as he passed the door, these words Did plainly come to Peter's ears;

And they such joyful tidings were,

The joy was more than he could bear!--

He melted into tears.

Sweet tears of hope and tenderness!

And fast they fell, a plenteous shower!

His nerves, his sinews seemed to melt; Through all his iron frame was felt

A gentle, a relaxing, power!

Each fibre of his frame was weak;

Weak all the animal within;

But, in its helplessness, grew mild

And gentle as an infant child,

An infant that has known no sin.

'Tis said, meek Beast! that, through Heaven's grace, He not unmoved did notice now

The cross upon thy shoulder scored,

For lasting impress, by the Lord

To whom all human-kind shall bow;

Memorial of his touch--that day

When Jesus humbly deigned to ride,

Entering the proud Jerusalem,

By an immeasurable stream

Of shouting people deified!

Meanwhile the persevering Ass,

Turned towards a gate that hung in view Across a shady lane; his chest

Against the yielding gate he pressed

And quietly passed through.

And up the stony lane he goes;

No ghost more softly ever trod;

Among the stones and pebbles, he

Sets down his hoofs inaudibly,

As if with felt his hoofs were shod.





Along the lane the trusty Ass

Went twice two hundred yards or more, And no one could have guessed his aim,--

Till to a lonely house he came,

And stopped beside the door.

Thought Peter, 'tis the poor man's home!

He listens--not a sound is heard

Save from the trickling household rill; But, stepping o'er the cottage-sill,


She to the Meeting-house was bound

In hopes some tidings there to gather: No glimpse it is, no doubtful gleam;

She saw--and uttered with a scream,

"My father! here's my father!"

The very word was plainly heard,

Heard plainly by the wretched Mother--

Her joy was like a deep affright:

And forth she rushed into the light,


And, instantly, upon the earth,

Beneath the full moon shining bright, Close to the Ass's feet she fell;

At the same moment Peter Bell

Dismounts in most unhappy plight.

As he beheld the Woman lie

Breathless and motionless, the mind

Of Peter sadly was confused;

But, though to such demands unused,

And helpless almost as the blind,

He raised her up; and, while he held

Her body propped against his knee,

The Woman waked--and when she spied

The poor Ass standing by her side,

She moaned most bitterly.

"Oh! God be praised--my heart's at ease--

For he is dead--I know it well!"

--At this she wept a bitter flood;

And, in the best way that he could,

His tale did Peter tell.

He trembles--he is pale as death;

His voice is weak with perturbation;

He turns aside his head, he pauses;

Poor Peter, from a thousand causes,





Is crippled sore in his narration.

At length she learned how he espied

The Ass in that small meadow-ground;

And that her Husband now lay dead,

Beside that luckless river's bed

In which he had been drowned.

A piercing look the Widow cast

Upon the Beast that near her stands;

She sees 'tis he, that 'tis the same; She calls the poor Ass by his name,

And wrings, and wrings her hands.

"O wretched loss--untimely stroke!

If he had died upon his bed!

He knew not one forewarning pain;

He never will come home again--

Is dead, for ever dead!"

Beside the woman Peter stands;

His heart is opening more and more;

A holy sense pervades his mind;

He feels what he for human kind

Had never felt before.

At length, by Peter's arm sustained,

The Woman rises from the ground--

"Oh, mercy! something must be done, My little Rachel, you must run,--

Some willing neighbour must be found.

"Make haste--my little Rachel--do, The first you meet with--bid him come, Ask him to lend his horse to-night,

And this good Man, whom Heaven requite, Will help to bring the body home."

Away goes Rachel weeping loud;--

An Infant, waked by her distress,

Makes in the house a piteous cry;

And Peter hears the Mother sigh,

"Seven are they, and all fatherless!"

And now is Peter taught to feel

That man's heart is a holy thing;

And Nature, through a world of death, Breathes into him a second breath,

More searching than the breath of spring.

Upon a stone the Woman sits

In agony of silent grief--





From his own thoughts did Peter start; He longs to press her to his heart,

From love that cannot find relief.

But roused, as if through every limb

Had past a sudden shock of dread,

The Mother o'er the threshold flies,

And up the cottage stairs she hies,

And on the pillow lays her burning head.

And Peter turns his steps aside

Into a shade of darksome trees,

Where he sits down, he knows not how, With his hands pressed against his brow, His elbows on his tremulous knees.

There, self-involved, does Peter sit

Until no sign of life he makes,

As if his mind were sinking deep

Through years that have been long asleep The trance is passed away--he wakes;

He lifts his head--and sees the Ass

Yet standing in the clear moonshine;

"When shall I be as good as thou?


But 'He'--who deviously hath sought

His Father through the lonesome woods, Hath sought, proclaiming to the ear

Of night his grief and sorrowful fear--

He comes, escaped from fields and floods;--

With weary pace is drawing nigh;

He sees the Ass--and nothing living

Had ever such a fit of joy

As hath this little orphan Boy,

For he has no misgiving!

Forth to the gentle Ass he springs,

And up about his neck he climbs;

In loving words he talks to him,

He kisses, kisses face and limb,--

He kisses him a thousand times!

This Peter sees, while in the shade

He stood beside the cottage-door;

And Peter Bell, the ruffian wild,

Sobs loud, he sobs even like a child,

"O God! I can endure no more!"





--Here ends my Tale: for in a trice

Arrived a neighbour with his horse;

Peter went forth with him straightway; And, with due care, ere break of day, Together they brought back the Corse.

And many years did this poor Ass,

Whom once it was my luck to see

Cropping the shrubs of Leming-Lane,

Help by his labour to maintain

The Widow and her family.

And Peter Bell, who, till that night, Had been the wildest of his clan,

Forsook his crimes, renounced his folly, And, after ten months' melancholy,

Became a good and honest man.

William Wordsworth





Pet-Lamb, The: A Pastoral Poem

The dew was falling fast, the stars began to blink; I heard a voice; it said, "Drink, pretty creature, drink!"

And, looking o'er the hedge, before me I espied A snow-white mountain-lamb with a Maiden at its side.

Nor sheep nor kine were near; the lamb was all alone, And by a slender cord was tethered to a stone; With one knee on the grass did the little Maiden kneel, While to that mountain-lamb she gave its evening meal.

The lamb, while from her hand he thus his supper took, Seemed to feast with head and ears; and his tail with pleasure shook.

"Drink, pretty creature, drink," she said in such a tone That I almost received her heart into my own.

'Twas little Barbara Lewthwaite, a child of beauty rare!

I watched them with delight, they were a lovely pair.

Now with her empty can the Maiden turned away: But ere ten yards were gone her footsteps did she stay.

Right towards the lamb she looked; and from a shady place I unobserved could see the workings of her face: If Nature to her tongue could measured numbers bring, Thus, thought I, to her lamb that little Maid might sing:

"What ails thee, young One? what? Why pull so at thy cord?

Is it not well with thee? well both for bed and board?

Thy plot of grass is soft, and green as grass can be; Rest, little young One, rest; what is't that aileth thee?

"What is it thou wouldst seek? What is wanting to thy heart?

Thy limbs are they not strong? And beautiful thou art: This grass is tender grass; these flowers they have no peers; And that green corn all day is rustling in thy ears!

"If the sun be shining hot, do but stretch thy woollen chain, This beech is standing by, its covert thou canst gain; For rain and mountain-storms! the like thou need'st not fear, The rain and storm are things that scarcely can come here.

"Rest, little young One, rest; thou hast forgot the day When my father found thee first in places far away; Many flocks were on the hills, but thou wert owned by none, And thy mother from thy side for evermore was gone.

"He took thee in his arms, and in pity brought thee home: A blessed day for thee! then whither wouldst thou roam?

A faithful nurse thou hast; the dam that did thee yean Upon the mountain-tops no kinder could have been.

"Thou know'st that twice a day I have brought thee in this can





Fresh water from the brook, as clear as ever ran; And twice in the day, when the ground is wet with dew, I bring thee draughts of milk, warm milk it is and new.

"Thy limbs will shortly be twice as stout as they are now, Then I'll yoke thee to my cart like a pony in the plough; My playmate thou shalt be; and when the wind is cold Our hearth shall be thy bed, our house shall be thy fold.

"It will not, will not rest!--Poor creature, can it be That 'tis thy mother's heart which is working so in thee?

Things that I know not of belike to thee are dear, And dreams of things which thou canst neither see nor hear.

"Alas, the mountain-tops that look so green and fair!

I've heard of fearful winds and darkness that come there; The little brooks that seem all pastime and all play, When they are angry, roar like lions for their prey.

"Here thou need'st not dread the raven in the sky; Night and day thou art safe,--our cottage is hard by.

Why bleat so after me? Why pull so at thy chain?

Sleep--and at break of day I will come to thee again!"

--As homeward through the lane I went with lazy feet, This song to myself did I oftentimes repeat; And it seemed, as I retraced the ballad line by line, That but half of it was hers, and one half of it was 'mine'.

Again, and once again, did I repeat the song;

"Nay," said I, "more than half to the damsel must belong, For she looked with such a look and she spake with such a tone, That I almost received her heart into my own."

William Wordsworth





Rainbow, The

My heart leaps up when I behold

A Rainbow in the sky:

So was it when my life began;

So is it now I am a man;

So be it when I shall grow old,

Or let me die!

The Child is father of the man;

And I wish my days to be

Bound each to each by natural piety.

William Wordsworth





Remembrance of Collins

Composed upon the Thames near Richmond Glide gently, thus for ever glide,

O Thames! that other bards may see

As lovely visions by thy side

As now, fair river! come to me.

O glide, fair stream! for ever so,

Thy quiet soul on all bestowing,

Till all our minds for ever flow

As thy deep waters now are flowing.

Vain thought!--Yet be as now thou art, That in thy waters may be seen

The image of a poet's heart,

How bright, how solemn, how serene!

Such as did once the Poet bless,

Who murmuring here a later ditty,

Could find no refuge from distress

But in the milder grief of pity.

Now let us, as we float along,

For 'him' suspend the dashing oar;

And pray that never child of song

May know that Poet's sorrows more.

How calm! how still! the only sound,

The dripping of the oar suspended!

--The evening darkness gathers round

By virtue's holiest Powers attended.

William Wordsworth





Resolution and Independence

I

There was a roaring in the wind all night; The rain came heavily and fell in floods; But now the sun is rising calm and bright; The birds are singing in the distant woods; Over his own sweet voice the Stock-dove broods; The Jay makes answer as the Magpie chatters; And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of waters.

II

All things that love the sun are out of doors; The sky rejoices in the morning's birth; The grass is bright with rain-drops;--on the moors The hare is running races in her mirth; And with her feet she from the plashy earth Raises a mist, that, glittering in the sun, Runs with her all the way, wherever she doth run.

III

I was a Traveller then upon the moor, I saw the hare that raced about with joy; I heard the woods and distant waters roar; Or heard them not, as happy as a boy: The pleasant season did my heart employ: My old remembrances went from me wholly; And all the ways of men, so vain and melancholy.

IV

But, as it sometimes chanceth, from the might Of joy in minds that can no further go, As high as we have mounted in delight In our dejection do we sink as low;

To me that morning did it happen so;

And fears and fancies thick upon me came; Dim sadness--and blind thoughts, I knew not, nor could name.

V

I heard the sky-lark warbling in the sky; And I bethought me of the playful hare: Even such a happy Child of earth am I; Even as these blissful creatures do I fare; Far from the world I walk, and from all care; But there may come another day to me--

Solitude, pain of heart, distress, and poverty.

VI

My whole life I have lived in pleasant thought,





As if life's business were a summer mood; As if all needful things would come unsought To genial faith, still rich in genial good; But how can He expect that others should Build for him, sow for him, and at his call Love him, who for himself will take no heed at all?

VII

I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous Boy, The sleepless Soul that perished in his pride; Of Him who walked in glory and in joy Following his plough, along the mountain-side: By our own spirits are we deified:

We Poets in our youth begin in gladness; But thereof come in the end despondency and madness.

VIII

Now, whether it were by peculiar grace, A leading from above, a something given, Yet it befell, that, in this lonely place, When I with these untoward thoughts had striven, Beside a pool bare to the eye of heaven I saw a Man before me unawares:

The oldest man he seemed that ever wore grey hairs.

IX

As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie Couched on the bald top of an eminence; Wonder to all who do the same espy,

By what means it could thither come, and whence; So that it seems a thing endued with sense: Like a sea-beast crawled forth, that on a shelf Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun itself; X

Such seemed this Man, not all alive nor dead, Nor all asleep--in his extreme old age: His body was bent double, feet and head Coming together in life's pilgrimage; As if some dire constraint of pain, or rage Of sickness felt by him in times long past, A more than human weight upon his frame had cast.

XI

Himself he propped, limbs, body, and pale face, Upon a long grey staff of shaven wood: And, still as I drew near with gentle pace,





Upon the margin of that moorish flood Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood, That heareth not the loud winds when they call And moveth all together, if it move at all.

XII

At length, himself unsettling, he the pond Stirred with his staff, and fixedly did look Upon the muddy water, which he conned, As if he had been reading in a book:

And now a stranger's privilege I took; And, drawing to his side, to him did say,

"This morning gives us promise of a glorious day."

XIII

A gentle answer did the old Man make, In courteous speech which forth he slowly drew: And him with further words I thus bespake,

"What occupation do you there pursue?

This is a lonesome place for one like you."

Ere he replied, a flash of mild surprise Broke from the sable orbs of his yet-vivid eyes, XIV

His words came feebly, from a feeble chest, But each in solemn order followed each, With something of a lofty utterance drest--

Choice word and measured phrase, above the reach Of ordinary men; a stately speech;

Such as grave Livers do in Scotland use, Religious men, who give to God and man their dues.

XV

He told, that to these waters he had come To gather leeches, being old and poor: Employment hazardous and wearisome!

And he had many hardships to endure:

From pond to pond he roamed, from moor to moor; Housing, with God's good help, by choice or chance, And in this way he gained an honest maintenance.

XVI

The old Man still stood talking by my side; But now his voice to me was like a stream Scarce heard; nor word from word could I divide; And the whole body of the Man did seem Like one whom I had met with in a dream;





Or like a man from some far region sent, To give me human strength, by apt admonishment.

XVII

My former thoughts returned: the fear that kills; And hope that is unwilling to be fed; Cold, pain, and labour, and all fleshly ills; And mighty Poets in their misery dead.

--Perplexed, and longing to be comforted, My question eagerly did I renew,

"How is it that you live, and what is it you do?"

XVIII

He with a smile did then his words repeat; And said, that, gathering leeches, far and wide He travelled; stirring thus about his feet The waters of the pools where they abide.

"Once I could meet with them on every side; But they have dwindled long by slow decay; Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may."

XIX

While he was talking thus, the lonely place, The old Man's shape, and speech--all troubled me: In my mind's eye I seemed to see him pace About the weary moors continually,

Wandering about alone and silently.

While I these thoughts within myself pursued, He, having made a pause, the same discourse renewed.

XX

And soon with this he other matter blended, Cheerfully uttered, with demeanour kind, But stately in the main; and when he ended, I could have laughed myself to scorn to find In that decrepit Man so firm a mind.

"God," said I, "be my help and stay secure; I'll think of the Leech-gatherer on the lonely moor!"

William Wordsworth





Reverie of Poor Susan, The

At the corner of Wood Street, when daylight appears, Hangs a Thrush that sings loud, it has sung for three years: Poor Susan has passed by the spot, and has heard In the silence of morning the song of the Bird.

Tis a note of enchantment; what ails her? She sees A mountain ascending, a vision of trees; Bright volumes of vapour through Lothbury glide, And a river flows on through the vale of Cheapside.

Green pastures she views in the midst of the dale, Down which she so often has tripped with her pail; And a single small cottage, a nest like a dove's, The one only dwelling on earth that she loves.

She looks, and her heart is in heaven: but they fade, The mist and the river, the hill and the shade: The stream will not flow, and the hill will not rise, And the colours have all passed away from her eyes!

William Wordsworth





Rural Architecture

There's George Fisher, Charles Fleming, and Reginald Shore, Three rosy-cheeked school-boys, the highest not more Than the height of a counsellor's bag; To the top of GREAT HOW did it please them to climb: And there they built up, without mortar or lime, A Man on the peak of the crag.

They built him of stones gathered up as they lay: They built him and christened him all in one day, An urchin both vigorous and hale;

And so without scruple they called him Ralph Jones.

Now Ralph is renowned for the length of his bones; The Magog of Legberthwaite dale.

Just half a week after, the wind sallied forth, And, in anger or merriment, out of the north, Coming on with a terrible pother,

From the peak of the crag blew the giant away.

And what did these school-boys?--The very next day They went and they built up another.

--Some little I've seen of blind boisterous works By Christian disturbers more savage than Turks, Spirits busy to do and undo:

At remembrance whereof my blood sometimes will flag; Then, light-hearted Boys, to the top of the crag!

And I'll build up giant with you.

William Wordsworth





Russian Fugitive, The

I

Enough of rose-bud lips, and eyes

Like harebells bathed in dew,

Of cheek that with carnation vies,

And veins of violet hue;

Earth wants not beauty that may scorn A likening to frail flowers;

Yea, to the stars, if they were born

For seasons and for hours.

Through Moscow's gates, with gold unbarred, Stepped One at dead of night,

Whom such high beauty could not guard From meditated blight;

By stealth she passed, and fled as fast As doth the hunted fawn,

Nor stopped, till in the dappling east Appeared unwelcome dawn.

Seven days she lurked in brake and field, Seven nights her course renewed,

Sustained by what her scrip might yield, Or berries of the wood;

At length, in darkness travelling on, When lowly doors were shut,

The haven of her hope she won,

Her foster-mother's hut.

"To put your love to dangerous proof I come," said she, "from far; For I have left my Father's roof,

In terror of the czar."

No answer did the Matron give,

No second look she cast,

But hung upon the fugitive,

Embracing and embraced.

She led the Lady to a seat

Beside the glimmering fire,

Bathed duteously her wayworn feet,

Prevented each desire:---

The cricket chirped, the house-dog dozed, And on that simple bed,

Where she in childhood had reposed,

Now rests her weary head.

When she, whose couch had been the sod, Whose curtain, pine or thorn,

Had breathed a sigh of thanks to God, Who comforts the forlorn;

While over her the Matron bent





Sleep sealed her eyes, and stole

Feeling from limbs with travel spent, And trouble from the soul.

Refreshed, the Wanderer rose at morn, And soon again was dight

In those unworthy vestments worn

Through long and perilous flight;

And "O beloved Nurse," she said,

"My thanks with silent tears

Have unto Heaven and You been paid:

Now listen to my fears !

"Have you forgot"---and here she smiled---

"The babbling flatteries

You lavished on me when a child

Disporting round your knees?

I was your lambkin, and your bird,

Your star, your gem, your flower;

Light words, that were more lightly heard In many a cloudless hour!

"The blossom you so fondly praised Is come to bitter fruit;

A mighty One upon me gazed;

I spurned his lawless suit,

And must be hidden from his wrath:

You, Foster-father dear,

Will guide me in my forward path;

I may not tarry here!

"I cannot bring to utter woe

Your proved fidelity."---

"Dear Child, sweet Mistress, say not so!

For you we both would die."

"Nay, nay, I come with semblance feigned And cheek embrowned by art;

Yet, being inwardly unstained,

With courage will depart."

"But whither would you, could you, flee?

A poor Man's counsel take;

The Holy Virgin gives to me

A thought for your dear sake;

Rest, shielded by our Lady's grace,

And soon shall you be led

Forth to a safe abiding-place,

Where never foot doth tread."

II

THE dwelling of this faithful pair

In a straggling village stood,





For One who breathed unquiet air

A dangerous neighbourhood;

But wide around lay forest ground

With thickets rough and blind;

And pine-trees made a heavy shade

Impervious to the wind.

And there, sequestered from the eight, Was spread a treacherous swamp,

On which the noonday sun shed light

As from a lonely lamp;

And midway in the unsafe morass,

A single Island rose

Of firm dry ground, with healthful grass Adorned, and shady boughs.

The Woodman knew, for such the craft

This Russian vassal plied,

That never fowler's gun, nor shaft

Of archer, there was tried;

A sanctuary seemed the spot

From all intrusion free;

And there he planned an artful Cot

For perfect secrecy.

With earnest pains unchecked by dread Of Power's far-stretching hand,

The bold good Man his labor sped

At nature's pure command;

Heart-soothed, and busy as a wren,

While, in a hollow nook,

She moulds her sight-eluding den

Above a murmuring brook.

His task accomplished to his mind,

The twain ere break of day

Creep forth, and through the forest wind Their solitary way;

Few words they speak, nor dare to slack Their pace from mile to mile,

Till they have crossed the quaking marsh, And reached the lonely Isle.

The sun above the pine-trees showed

A bright and cheerful face;

And Ina looked for her abode,

The promised hiding-place;

She sought in vain, the Woodman smiled; No threshold could be seen,

Nor roof, nor window;Ñall seemed wild As it had ever been.





Advancing, you might guess an hour,

The front with such nice care

Is masked, 'if house it be or bower,'

But in they entered are;

As shaggy as were wall and roof

With branches intertwined,

So smooth was all within, air-proof,

And delicately lined:

And hearth was there, and maple dish, And cups in seemly rows,

And couch---all ready to a wish

For nurture or repose;

And Heaven doth to her virtue grant

That here she may abide

In solitude, with every want

By cautious love supplied.

No queen, before a shouting crowd,

Led on in bridal state,

E'er struggled with a heart so proud, Entering her palace gate:

Rejoiced to bid the world farewell,

No saintly anchoress

E'er took possession of her cell

With deeper thankfulness.

"Father of all, upon thy care

And mercy am I thrown;

Be thou my safeguard!"---such her prayer When she was left alone,

Kneeling amid the wilderness

When joy had passed away,

And smiles, fond efforts of distress

To hide what they betray!

The prayer is heard, the Saints have seen, Diffused through form and face,

Resolves devotedly serene;

That monumental grace

Of Faith, which doth all passions tame That Reason should control;

And shows in the untrembling frame

A statue of the soul.

III

'TIS sung in ancient minstrelsy

That Phoebus wont to wear

The leaves of any pleasant tree

Around his golden hair;

Till Daphne, desperate with pursuit

Of his imperious love,





At her own prayer transformed, took root, A laurel in the grove.

Then did the Penitent adorn

His brow with laurel green;

And 'mid his bright locks never shorn No meaner leaf was seen;

And poets sage, through every age,

About their temples wound

The bay; and conquerors thanked the Gods, With laurel chaplets crowned,

Into the mists of fabling Time

So far runs back the praise

Of Beauty, that disdains to climb

Along forbidden ways;

That scorns temptation; power defies

Where mutual love is not;

And to the tomb for rescue flies

When life would be a blot.

To this fair Votaress, a fate

More mild doth Heaven ordain

Upon her Island desolate;

And word, not breathed in vain,

Might tell what intercourse she found, Her silence to endear;

What birds she tamed, what flowers the ground Sent forth her peace to cheer.

To one mute Presence, above all,

Her soothed affections clung,

A picture on the cabin wall

By Russian usage hung---

The Mother-maid, whose countenance bright With love abridged the day;

And, communed with by taper light,

Chased spectral fears away.

And oft as either Guardian came,

The joy in that retreat

Might any common friendship shame,

So high their heart would beat;

And to the lone Recluse, whate'er

They brought, each visiting

Was like the crowding of the year

With a new burst of spring.

But, when she of her Parents thought, The pang was hard to bear;

And, if with all things not enwrought, That trouble still is near.





Before her flight she had not dared

Their constancy to prove,

Too much the heroic Daughter feared

The weakness of their love.

Dark is the past to them, and dark

The future still must be,

Till pitying Saints conduct her bark

Into a safer sea---

Or gentle Nature close her eyes,

And set her Spirit free

From the altar of this sacrifice,

In vestal purity.

Yet, when above the forest-glooms

The white swans southward passed,

High as the pitch of their swift plume Her fancy rode the blast;

And bore her toward the fields of France Her Father's native land,

To mingle in the rustic dance,

The happiest of the band!

Of those beloved fields she oft

Had heard her Father tell

In phrase that now with echoes soft

Haunted her lonely cell;

She saw the hereditary bowers,

She heard the ancestral stream;

The Kremlin and its haughty towers

Forgotten like a dream !

IV

THE ever-changing Moon had traced

Twelve times her monthly round,

When through the unfrequented Waste

Was heard a startling sound;

A shout thrice sent from one who chased At speed a wounded deer,

Bounding through branches interlaced, And where the wood was clear.

The fainting creature took the marsh, And toward the Island fled,

While plovers screamed with tumult harsh Above his antlered head;

This, Ina saw; and, pale with fear,

Shrunk to her citadel;

The desperate deer rushed on, and near The tangled covert fell.

Across the marsh, the game in view,





The Hunter followed fast,

Nor paused, till o'er the stag he blew A death-proclaiming blast;

Then, resting on her upright mind,

Came forth the Maid---"In me

Behold," she said, " a stricken Hind Pursued by destiny!

"From your deportment, Sir! I deem That you have worn a sword,

And will not hold in light esteem

A suffering woman's word;

There is my covert, there perchance

I might have lain concealed,

My fortunes hid, my countenance

Not even to you revealed.

"Tears might be shed, and I might pray, Crouching and terrified,

That what has been unveiled to day,

You would in mystery hide;

But I will not defile with dust

The knee that bend to adore

The God in heaven;---attend, be just; This ask I, and no more!

"I speak not of the winter's cold, For summer's heat exchanged,

While I have lodged in this rough hold, From social life estranged;

Nor yet of trouble and alarms:

High Heaven is my defence;

And every season has soft arms

For injured Innocence.

"From Moscow to the Wilderness

It was my choice to come,

Lest virtue should be harborless,

And honor want a home;

And happy were I, if the Czar

Retain his lawless will,

To end life here like this poor deer, Or a lamb on a green hill."

"Are you the Maid," the Stranger cried,

"From Gallic parents sprung,

Whose vanishing was rumored wide,

Sad theme for every tongue;

Who foiled an Emperor's eager quest?

You, Lady, forced to wear

These rude habiliments, and rest

Your head in this dark lair!"





But wonder, pity, soon were quelled;

And in her face and mien

The soul's pure brightness she beheld Without a veil between:

He loved, he hoped,---a holy flame

Kindled 'mid rapturous tears;

The passion of a moment came

As on the wings of years.

"Such bounty is no gift of chance,"

Exclaimed he; "righteous Heaven, Preparing your deliverance,

To me the charge hath given.

The Czar full oft in words, and deeds Is stormy and self-willed;

But, when the Lady Catherine pleads,

His violence is stilled.

"Leave open to my wish the course, And I to her will go;

From that humane and heavenly source, Good, only good, can flow.''

Faint sanction given, the Cavalier

Was eager to depart,

Though question followed question, dear To the Maiden's filial heart.

Light was his step,---his hopes, more light, Kept pace with his desires;

And the fifth morning gave him sight

Of Moscow's glittering spires.

He sued:---heart-smitten by the wrong, To the lorn Fugitive

The Emperor sent a pledge as strong

As sovereign power could give.

O more than mighty change! If e'er

Amazement rose to pain,

And joy's excess produced a fear

Of something void and vain;

'Twas when the Parents, who had mourned So long the lost as dead,

Beheld their only Child returned,

The household floor to tread.

Soon gratitude gave way to love

Within the Maiden's breast:

Delivered and Deliverer move

In bridal garments drest;

Meek Catherine had her own reward;

The Czar bestowed a dower;





And universal Moscow shared

The triumph of that hour.

Flowers strewed the ground; the nuptial feast Was held with costly state;

And there, 'mid many a noble guest,

The foster-parent sate;

Encouraged by the imperial eye,

They shrank not into shade;

Great as their bliss, the honor high

To them and nature paid!

William Wordsworth





Ruth

When Ruth was left half desolate,

Her Father took another Mate;

And Ruth, not seven years old,

A slighted child, at her own will

Went wandering over dale and hill,

In thoughtless freedom, bold.

And she had made a pipe of straw,

And music from that pipe could draw

Like sounds of winds and floods;

Had built a bower upon the green,

As if she from her birth had been

An infant of the woods.

Beneath her father's roof, alone

She seemed to live; her thoughts her own; Herself her own delight;

Pleased with herself, nor sad, nor gay; And, passing thus the live-long day,

She grew to woman's height.

There came a Youth from Georgia's shore--

A military casque he wore,

With splendid feathers drest;

He brought them from the Cherokees;

The feathers nodded in the breeze,

And made a gallant crest.

From Indian blood you deem him sprung: But no! he spake the English tongue,

And bore a soldier's name;

And, when America was free

From battle and from jeopardy,

He 'cross the ocean came.

With hues of genius on his cheek

In finest tones the Youth could speak:

--While he was yet a boy,

The moon, the glory of the sun,

And streams that murmur as they run,

Had been his dearest joy.

He was a lovely Youth! I guess

The panther in the wilderness

Was not so fair as he;

And, when he chose to sport and play, No dolphin ever was so gay

Upon the tropic sea.

Among the Indians he had fought,

And with him many tales he brought

Of pleasure and of fear;





Such tales as told to any maid

By such a Youth, in the green shade,

Were perilous to hear.

He told of girls--a happy rout!

Who quit their fold with dance and shout, Their pleasant Indian town,

To gather strawberries all day long;

Returning with a choral song

When daylight is gone down.

He spake of plants that hourly change Their blossoms, through a boundless range Of intermingling hues;

With budding, fading, faded flowers

They stand the wonder of the bowers

From morn to evening dews.

He told of the magnolia, spread

High as a cloud, high over head!

The cypress and her spire;

--Of flowers that with one scarlet gleam Cover a hundred leagues, and seem

To set the hills on fire.

The Youth of green savannahs spake,

And many an endless, endless lake,

With all its fairy crowds

Of islands, that together lie

As quietly as spots of sky

Among the evening clouds.

"How pleasant," then he said, "it were A fisher or a hunter there,

In sunshine or in shade

To wander with an easy mind;

And build a household fire, and find

A home in every glade!

"What days and what bright years! Ah me!

Our life were life indeed, with thee

So passed in quiet bliss,

And all the while," said he, "to know That we were in a world of woe,

On such an earth as this!"

And then he sometimes interwove

Fond thoughts about a father's love

"For there," said he, "are spun Around the heart such tender ties,

That our own children to our eyes

Are dearer than the sun.





"Sweet Ruth! and could you go with me My helpmate in the woods to be,

Our shed at night to rear;

Or run, my own adopted bride,

A sylvan huntress at my side,

And drive the flying deer!

"Beloved Ruth!"--No more he said, The wakeful Ruth at midnight shed

A solitary tear:


With him to sail across the sea,

And drive the flying deer.

"And now, as fitting is and right, We in the church our faith will plight, A husband and a wife."

Even so they did; and I may say

That to sweet Ruth that happy day

Was more than human life.

Through dream and vision did she sink, Delighted all the while to think

That on those lonesome floods,

And green savannahs, she should share His board with lawful joy, and bear

His name in the wild woods.

But, as you have before been told,

This Stripling, sportive, gay, and bold, And, with his dancing crest,

So beautiful, through savage lands

Had roamed about, with vagrant bands

Of Indians in the West.

The wind, the tempest roaring high,

The tumult of a tropic sky,

Might well be dangerous food

For him, a Youth to whom was given

So much of earth--so much of heaven,

And such impetuous blood.

Whatever in those climes he found

Irregular in sight or sound

Did to his mind impart

A kindred impulse, seemed allied

To his own powers, and justified

The workings of his heart.

Nor less, to feed voluptuous thought, The beauteous forms of nature wrought,





Fair trees and gorgeous flowers;

The breezes their own languor lent;

The stars had feelings, which they sent Into those favoured bowers.

Yet, in his worst pursuits, I ween

That sometimes there did intervene

Pure hopes of high intent:

For passions linked to forms so fair

And stately, needs must have their share Of noble sentiment.

But ill he lived, much evil saw,

With men to whom no better law

Nor better life was known;

Deliberately, and undeceived,

Those wild men's vices he received,

And gave them back his own.

His genius and his moral frame

Were thus impaired, and he became

The slave of low desires:

A Man who without self-control

Would seek what the degraded soul

Unworthily admires.

And yet he with no feigned delight

Had wooed the Maiden, day and night

Had loved her, night and morn:

What could he less than love a Maid

Whose heart with so much nature played?

So kind and so forlorn!

Sometimes, most earnestly, he said,

"O Ruth! I have been worse than dead; False thoughts, thoughts bold and vain, Encompassed me on every side

When I, in confidence and pride,

Had crossed the Atlantic main.

"Before me shone a glorious world--

Fresh as a banner bright, unfurled

To music suddenly:

I looked upon those hills and plains, And seemed as if let loose from chains, To live at liberty.

"No more of this; for now, by thee Dear Ruth! more happily set free

With nobler zeal I burn;

My soul from darkness is released,

Like the whole sky when to the east





The morning doth return."

Full soon that better mind was gone;

No hope, no wish remained, not one,--

They stirred him now no more;

New objects did new pleasure give,

And once again he wished to live

As lawless as before.

Meanwhile, as thus with him it fared, They for the voyage were prepared,

And went to the sea-shore,

But, when they thither came the Youth Deserted his poor Bride, and Ruth

Could never find him more.

God help thee, Ruth!--Such pains she had, That she in half a year was mad,

And in a prison housed;

And there, with many a doleful song

Made of wild words, her cup of wrong

She fearfully caroused.

Yet sometimes milder hours she knew,


Nor pastimes of the May;

--They all were with her in her cell; And a clear brook with cheerful knell Did o'er the pebbles play.

When Ruth three seasons thus had lain, There came a respite to her pain;

She from her prison fled;

But of the Vagrant none took thought; And where it liked her best she sought Her shelter and her bread.

Among the fields she breathed again:

The master-current of her brain

Ran permanent and free;

And, coming to the Banks of Tone,

There did she rest; and dwell alone

Under the greenwood tree.

The engines of her pain, the tools

That shaped her sorrow, rocks and pools, And airs that gently stir

The vernal leaves--she loved them still; Nor ever taxed them with the ill

Which had been done to her.

A Barn her 'winter' bed supplies;





But, till the warmth of summer skies

And summer days is gone,

(And all do in this tale agree)

She sleeps beneath the greenwood tree, And other home hath none.

An innocent life, yet far astray!

And Ruth will, long before her day,

Be broken down and old:

Sore aches she needs must have! but less Of mind, than body's wretchedness,

From damp, and rain, and cold.

If she is prest by want of food,

She from her dwelling in the wood

Repairs to a road-side;

And there she begs at one steep place Where up and down with easy pace

The horsemen-travellers ride.

That oaten pipe of hers is mute,

Or thrown away; but with a flute

Her loneliness she cheers:

This flute, made of a hemlock stalk,

At evening in his homeward walk

The Quantock woodman hears.

I, too, have passed her on the hills

Setting her little water-mills

By spouts and fountains wild--

Such small machinery as she turned

Ere she had wept, ere she had mourned, A young and happy Child!

Farewell! and when thy days are told, Ill-fated Ruth, in hallowed mould

Thy corpse shall buried be,

For thee a funeral bell shall ring,

And all the congregation sing

A Christian psalm for thee.

William Wordsworth





Sailor's Mother, The

One morning (raw it was and wet---

A foggy day in winter time)

A Woman on the road I met,

Not old, though something past her prime: Majestic in her person, tall and straight; And like a Roman matron's was her mien and gait.

The ancient spirit is not dead;

Old times, thought I, are breathing there; Proud was I that my country bred

Such strength, a dignity so fair:

She begged an alms, like one in poor estate; I looked at her again, nor did my pride abate.

When from these lofty thoughts I woke,

"What is it," said I, "that you bear, Beneath the covert of your Cloak,

Protected from this cold damp air? "

She anwered, soon as she the question heard,

"A simple burthen, Sir, a little Singing-bird."

And, thus continuing, she said,

"I had a Son, who many a day

Sailed on the seas, but he is dead;

In Denmark he was cast away:

And I have travelled weary miles to see If aught which he had owned might still remain for me.

The bird and cage they both were his:

'Twas my Son's bird; and neat and trim He kept it: many voyages

The singing-bird had gone with him;

When last he sailed, he left the bird behind; From bodings, as might be, that hung upon his mind.

He to a fellow-lodger's care

Had left it, to be watched and fed,

And pipe its song in safety;---there

I found it when my Son was dead;

And now, God help me for my little wit!

I bear it with me, Sir;---he took so much delight in it."

William Wordsworth





Scorn Not the Sonnet

Scorn not the Sonnet; Critic, you have frowned, Mindless of its just honours; with this key Shakspeare unlocked his heart; the melody Of this small lute gave ease to Petrarch's wound; A thousand times this pipe did Tasso sound; With it Camoens soothed an exile's grief; The Sonnet glittered a gay myrtle leaf Amid the cypress with which Dante crowned His visionary brow: a glow-worm lamp, It cheered mild Spenser, called from Faery-land To struggle through dark ways; and when a damp Fell round the path of Milton, in his hand The Thing became a trumpet; whence he blew Soul-animating strains--alas, too few!

William Wordsworth






. Departing summer hath assumed

An aspect tenderly illumed,

The gentlest look of spring;

That calls from yonder leafy shade

Unfaded, yet prepared to fade,

A timely carolling.

No faint and hesitating trill,

Such tribute as to winter chill

The lonely redbreast pays!

Clear, loud, and lively is the din,

From social warblers gathering in

Their harvest of sweet lays.

Nor doth the example fail to cheer

Me, conscious that my leaf is sere,

And yellow on the bough:-

Fall, rosy garlands, from my head!

Ye myrtle wreaths, your fragrance shed Around a younger brow!

Yet will I temperately rejoice;

Wide is the range, and free the choice Of undiscordant themes;

Which, haply, kindred souls may prize Not less than vernal ecstasies,

And passion's feverish dreams.

For deathless powers to verse belong, And they like Demi-gods are strong

On whom the Muses smile;

But some their function have disclaimed, Best pleased with what is aptliest framed To enervate and defile.

Not such the initiatory strains

Committed to the silent plains

In Britain's earliest dawn:

Trembled the groves, the stars grew pale, While all-too-daringly the veil

Of nature was withdrawn!

Nor such the spirit-stirring note

When the live chords Alcæus smote,

Inflamed by sense of wrong;

Woe! woe to Tyrants! from the lyre

Broke threateningly, in sparkles dire Of fierce vindictive song.

And not unhallowed was the page

By wingèd Love inscribed, to assuage

The pangs of vain pursuit;

Love listening while the Lesbian Maid





With finest touch of passion swayed

Her own Æolian lute.

O ye, who patiently explore

The wreck of Herculanean lore,

What rapture! could ye seize

Some Theban fragment, or unroll

One precious, tender-hearted scroll

Of pure Simonides.

That were, indeed, a genuine birth

Of poesy; a bursting forth

Of genius from the dust:

What Horace gloried to behold,

What Maro loved, shall we enfold?

Can haughty Time be just!

William Wordsworth





Seven Sisters, The

Seven Daughter had Lord Archibald,

All children of one mother:

You could not say in one short day

What love they bore each other.

A garland, of seven lilies, wrought!

Seven sisters that together dwell;

But he, bold Knight as ever fought,

Their Father, took of them no thought, He loved the wars so well.

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

Fresh blows the wind, a western wind, And from the shores of Erin,

Across the wave, a Rover brave

To Binnorie is steering:

Right onward to the Scottish strand

The gallant ship is borne;

The warriors leap upon the land,

And hark! the Leader of the band

Hath blown his bugle horn.

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

Beside a grotto of their own,

With boughs above them closing,

The Seven are laid, and in the shade

They lie like fawns reposing.

But now, upstarting with affright

At noise of man and steed,

Away they fly to left, to rightÑ

Of your fair household, Father-knight, Methinks you take small heed!

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

Away the even fair Campbells fly,

And, over hill and hollow,

With menace proud, and insult loud,

The youthful Rovers follow.

Cried they, "Your Father loves to roam: Enough for him to find

The empty house when he comes home;

For us your yellow ringlets comb,

For us be fair and kind!"

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

Some close behind, some side to side, Like clouds in stormy weather;

They run, and cry, "Nay, let us die, And let us die together."





A lake was near; the shore was steep; There never foot had been;

They ran, and with a deperate leap

Together plunged into the deep,

Nor ever more were seen.

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

The stream that flows out of the lake, As through the glen it rambles,

Repeats a moan o'er moss and stone,

For those seven lovely Campbells.

Seven little Islands, green and bare, Have risen from out the deep:

The fishers say, those sisters fair,

By faeries all are buried there,

And there together sleep.

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

William Wordsworth





She Dwelt Among the Untrodden Ways

She dwelt among the untrodden ways

Beside the springs of Dove,

A Maid whom there were none to praise And very few to love:

A violet by a mossy stone

Half hidden from the eye!

--Fair as a star, when only one

Is shining in the sky.

She lived unknown, and few could know When Lucy ceased to be;

But she is in her grave, and, oh,

The difference to me!

William Wordsworth





She Dwelt Among Untrodden Ways

SHE dwelt among the untrodden ways

Beside the springs of Dove,

Maid whom there were none to praise

And very few to love:

A violet by a mosy tone

Half hidden from the eye!

---Fair as a star, when only one

Is shining in the sky.

She lived unknown, and few could know When Lucy ceased to be;

But she is in her grave, and, oh,

The difference to me!

William Wordsworth





She Was a Phantom of Delight

She was a phantom of delight

When first she gleamed upon my sight; A lovely Apparition, sent

To be a moment's ornament;

Her eyes as stars of Twilight fair;

Like Twilight's, too, her dusky hair; But all things else about her drawn

From May-time and the cheerful Dawn;

A dancing Shape, an Image gay,

To haunt, to startle, and way-lay.

I saw her upon a nearer view,

A Spirit, yet a Woman too!

Her household motions light and free, And steps of virgin liberty;

A countenance in which did meet

Sweet records, promises as sweet;

A Creature not too bright or good

For human nature's daily food;

For transient sorrows, simple wiles,

Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears and smiles.

And now I see with eye serene

The very pulse of the machine;

A Being breathing thoughtful breath,

A Traveler between life and death;

The reason firm, the temperate will,

Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill; A perfect Woman, nobly planned,

To warm, to comfort, and command;

And yet a Spirit still, and bright,

With something of angelic light.

William Wordsworth





Simon Lee, The Old Huntsman

In the sweet shire of Cardigan,

Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall,

An old Man dwells, a little man,--

'Tis said he once was tall.

Full five-and-thirty years he lived

A running huntsman merry;

And still the centre of his cheek

Is red as a ripe cherry.

No man like him the horn could sound, And hill and valley rang with glee

When Echo bandied, round and round,

The halloo of Simon Lee.

In those proud days, he little cared

For husbandry or tillage;

To blither tasks did Simon rouse

The sleepers of the village.

He all the country could outrun,

Could leave both man and horse behind; And often, ere the chase was done,

He reeled, and was stone-blind.

And still there's something in the world At which his heart rejoices;

For when the chiming hounds are out,

He dearly loves their voices!

But, oh the heavy change!--bereft

Of health, strength, friends, and kindred, see!

Old Simon to the world is left

In liveried poverty.

His Master's dead,--and no one now

Dwells in the Hall of Ivor;

Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead;

He is the sole survivor.

And he is lean and he is sick;

His body, dwindled and awry,

Rests upon ankles swoln and thick;

His legs are thin and dry.

One prop he has, and only one,

His wife, an aged woman,

Lives with him, near the waterfall,

Upon the village Common.

Beside their moss-grown hut of clay,

Not twenty paces from the door,

A scrap of land they have, but they

Are poorest of the poor.

This scrap of land he from the heath

Enclosed when he was stronger;

But what to them avails the land





Which he can till no longer?

Oft, working by her Husband's side,

Ruth does what Simon cannot do;

For she, with scanty cause for pride, Is stouter of the two.

And, though you with your utmost skill From labour could not wean them,

'Tis little, very little--all

That they can do between them.

Few months of life has he in store

As he to you will tell,

For still, the more he works, the more Do his weak ankles swell.

My gentle Reader, I perceive

How patiently you've waited,

And now I fear that you expect

Some tale will be related.

O Reader! had you in your mind

Such stores as silent thought can bring, O gentle Reader! you would find

A tale in every thing.

What more I have to say is short,

And you must kindly take it:

It is no tale; but, should you think, Perhaps a tale you'll make it.

One summer-day I chanced to see

This old Man doing all he could

To unearth the root of an old tree,

A stump of rotten wood.

The mattock tottered in his hand;

So vain was his endeavour,

That at the root of the old tree

He might have worked for ever.

"You're overtasked, good Simon Lee, Give me your tool," to him I said; And at the word right gladly he

Received my proffered aid.

I struck, and with a single blow

The tangled root I severed,

At which the poor old Man so long

And vainly had endeavoured.

The tears into his eyes were brought, And thanks and praises seemed to run

So fast out of his heart, I thought

They never would have done.

--I've heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds





With coldness still returning;

Alas! the gratitude of men

Hath oftener left me mourning.

William Wordsworth





Simon Lee: The Old Huntsman

. With an incident in which he was concerned In the sweet shire of Cardigan,

Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall,

An old Man dwells, a little man,--

'Tis said he once was tall.

For five-and-thirty years he lived

A running huntsman merry;

And still the centre of his cheek

Is red as a ripe cherry.

No man like him the horn could sound, And hill and valley rang with glee

When Echo bandied, round and round

The halloo of Simon Lee.

In those proud days, he little cared

For husbandry or tillage;

To blither tasks did Simon rouse

The sleepers of the village.

He all the country could outrun,

Could leave both man and horse behind; And often, ere the chase was done,

He reeled, and was stone-blind.

And still there's something in the world At which his heart rejoices;

For when the chiming hounds are out,

He dearly loves their voices!

But, oh the heavy change!--bereft

Of health, strength, friends, and kindred, see!

Old Simon to the world is left

In liveried poverty.

His Master's dead--and no one now

Dwells in the Hall of Ivor;

Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead;

He is the sole survivor.

And he is lean and he is sick;

His body, dwindled and awry,

Rests upon ankles swoln and thick;

His legs are thin and dry.

One prop he has, and only one,

His wife, an aged woman,

Lives with him, near the waterfall,

Upon the village Common.

Beside their moss-grown hut of clay,

Not twenty paces from the door,

A scrap of land they have, but they

Are poorest of the poor.

This scrap of land he from the heath

Enclosed when he was stronger;

But what to them avails the land





Which he can till no longer?

Oft, working by her Husband's side,

Ruth does what Simon cannot do;

For she, with scanty cause for pride, Is stouter of the two.

And, though you with your utmost skill From labour could not wean them,

'Tis little, very little--all

That they can do between them.

Few months of life has he in store

As he to you will tell,

For still, the more he works, the more Do his weak ankles swell.

My gentle Reader, I perceive,

How patiently you've waited,

And now I fear that you expect

Some tale will be related.

O Reader! had you in your mind

Such stores as silent thought can bring, O gentle Reader! you would find

A tale in every thing.

What more I have to say is short,

And you must kindly take it:

It is no tale; but, should you think, Perhaps a tale you'll make it.

One summer-day I chanced to see

This old Man doing all he could

To unearth the root of an old tree,

A stump of rotten wood.

The mattock tottered in his hand;

So vain was his endeavour,

That at the root of the old tree

He might have worked for ever.

"You're overtasked, good Simon Lee, Give me your tool," to him I said; And at the word right gladly he

Received my proffered aid.

I struck, and with a single blow

The tangled root I severed,

At which the poor old Man so long

And vainly had endeavoured.

The tears into his eyes were brought, And thanks and praises seemed to run

So fast out of his heart, I thought

They never would have done.

--I've heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds





With coldness still returning;

Alas! the gratitude of men

Hath oftener left me mourning.

William Wordsworth





Simplon Pass, The

------Brook and road

Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy Pass, And with them did we journey several hours At a slow step. The immeasurable height Of woods decaying, never to be decayed, The stationary blasts of waterfalls,

And in the narrow rent, at every turn, Winds thwarting winds bewildered and forlorn, The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky, The rocks that muttered close upon our ears, Black drizzling crags that spake by the wayside As if a voice were in them, the sick sight And giddy prospect of the raving stream, The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens, Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light--

Were all like workings of one mind, the features Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree, Characters of the great Apocalypse,

The types and symbols of Eternity,

Of first, and last, and midst, and without end.

William Wordsworth





Solitary Reaper, The

Behold her, single in the field,

Yon solitary Highland Lass!

Reaping and singing by herself;

Stop here, or gently pass!

Alone she cuts and binds the grain,

And sings a melancholy strain;

O listen! for the Vale profound

Is overflowing with the sound.

No Nightingale did ever chaunt

More welcome notes to weary bands

Of travellers in some shady haunt,

Among Arabian sands:

A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard

In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird,

Breaking the silence of the seas

Among the farthest Hebrides.

Will no one tell me what she sings?--

Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow

For old, unhappy, far-off things,

And battles long ago:

Or is it some more humble lay,

Familiar matter of to-day?

Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,

That has been, and may be again?

Whate'er the theme, the Maiden sang

As if her song could have no ending;

I saw her singing at her work,

And o'er the sickle bending;--

I listened, motionless and still;

And, as I mounted up the hill,

The music in my heart I bore,

Long after it was heard no more.

William Wordsworth





Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle upon the Restoration o

, High in the breathless Hall the Minstrel sate, And Emont's murmur mingled with the Song.--

The words of ancient time I thus translate, A festal strain that hath been silent long:--

"From town to town, from tower to tower, The red rose is a gladsome flower.

Her thirty years of winter past,

The red rose is revived at last;

She lifts her head for endless spring, For everlasting blossoming:

Both roses flourish, red and white:

In love and sisterly delight

The two that were at strife are blended, And all old troubles now are ended.--

Joy! joy to both! but most to her

Who is the flower of Lancaster!

Behold her how She smiles to-day

On this great throng, this bright array!

Fair greeting doth she send to all

From every corner of the hall;

But chiefly from above the board

Where sits in state our rightful Lord, A Clifford to his own restored!

"They came with banner, spear, and shield; And it was proved in Bosworth-field.

Not long the Avenger was withstood--

Earth helped him with the cry of blood: St. George was for us, and the might

Of blessed Angels crowned the right.

Loud voice the Land has uttered forth, We loudest in the faithful north:

Our fields rejoice, our mountains ring, Our streams proclaim a welcoming;

Our strong-abodes and castles see

The glory of their loyalty.

"How glad is Skipton at this hour--

Though lonely, a deserted Tower;

Knight, squire, and yeoman, page and groom, We have them at the feast of Brough'm.

How glad Pendragon--though the sleep

Of years be on her!--She shall reap

A taste of this great pleasure, viewing As in a dream her own renewing.

Rejoiced is Brough, right glad, I deem, Beside her little humble stream;

And she that keepeth watch and ward

Her statelier Eden's course to guard; They both are happy at this hour,

Though each is but a lonely Tower:--

But here is perfect joy and pride





For one fair House by Emont's side,

This day, distinguished without peer, To see her Master and to cheer--

Him, and his Lady-mother dear!

"Oh! it was a time forlorn

When the fatherless was born--

Give her wings that she may fly,

Or she sees her infant die!

Swords that are with slaughter wild

Hunt the Mother and the Child.

Who will take them from the light?

--Yonder is a man in sight--

Yonder is a house--but where?

No, they must not enter there.

To the caves, and to the brooks,

To the clouds of heaven she looks;

She is speechless, but her eyes

Pray in ghostly agonies.

Blissful Mary, Mother mild,

Maid and Mother undefiled,

Save a Mother and her Child!

"Now who is he that bounds with joy On Carrock's side, a Shepherd-boy?

No thoughts hath he but thoughts that pass Light as the wind along the grass.

Can this be He who hither came

In secret, like a smothered flame?

O'er whom such thankful tears were shed For shelter, and a poor man's bread!

God loves the Child; and God hath willed That those dear words should be fulfilled, The Lady's words, when forced away

The last she to her Babe did say:

"My own, my own, thy fellow-guest I may not be; but rest thee, rest,

For lowly shepherd's life is best!"

"Alas! when evil men are strong

No life is good, no pleasure long.

The Boy must part from Mosedale's groves, And leave Blencathara's rugged coves, And quit the flowers that summer brings To Glenderamakin's lofty springs;

Must vanish, and his careless cheer

Be turned to heaviness and fear.

--Give Sir Lancelot Threlkeld praise!

Hear it, good man, old in days!

Thou tree of covert and of rest

For this young Bird that is distrest; Among thy branches safe he lay,





And he was free to sport and play,

When falcons were abroad for prey.

"A recreant harp, that sings of fear And heaviness in Clifford's ear!

I said, when evil men are strong,

No life is good, no pleasure long,

A weak and cowardly untruth!

Our Clifford was a happy Youth,

And thankful through a weary time,

That brought him up to manhood's prime.

--Again he wanders forth at will,

And tends a flock from hill to hill:

His garb is humble; ne'er was seen

Such garb with such a noble mien;

Among the shepherd-grooms no mate

Hath he, a Child of strength and state!

Yet lacks not friends for simple glee, Nor yet for higher sympathy.

To his side the fallow-deer

Came and rested without fear;

The eagle, lord of land and sea,

Stooped down to pay him fealty;

And both the undying fish that swim

Through Bowscale-tarn did wait on him; The pair were servants of his eye

In their immortality;

And glancing, gleaming, dark or bright, Moved to and fro, for his delight.

He knew the rocks which Angels haunt

Upon the mountains visitant;

He hath kenned them taking wing:

And into caves where Faeries sing

He hath entered; and been told

By Voices how men lived of old.

Among the heavens his eye can see

The face of thing that is to be;

And, if that men report him right,

His tongue could whisper words of might.

--Now another day is come,

Fitter hope, and nobler doom;

He hath thrown aside his crook,

And hath buried deep his book;

Armour rusting in his halls

On the blood of Clifford calls,--

'Quell the Scot,' exclaims the Lance--

Bear me to the heart of France,

Is the longing of the Shield--

Tell thy name, thou trembling field;





Field of death, where'er thou be,

Groan thou with our victory!

Happy day, and mighty hour,

When our Shepherd, in his power,

Mailed and horsed, with lance and sword, To his ancestors restored

Like a re-appearing Star,

Like a glory from afar

First shall head the flock of war!"

Alas! the impassioned minstrel did not know How, by Heaven's grace, this Clifford's heart was framed: How he, long forced in humble walks to go, Was softened into feeling, soothed, and tamed.

Love had he found in huts where poor men lie; His daily teachers had been woods and rills, The silence that is in the starry sky, The sleep that is among the lonely hills.

In him the savage virtue of the Race, Revenge and all ferocious thoughts were dead: Nor did he change; but kept in lofty place The wisdom which adversity had bred.

Glad were the vales, and every cottage-hearth; The Shepherd-lord was honoured more and more; And, ages after he was laid in earth,

"The good Lord Clifford" was the name he bore.

William Wordsworth





Song For The Wandering Jew

Though the torrents from their fountains Roar down many a craggy steep,

Yet they find among the mountains

Resting-places calm and deep.

Clouds that love through air to hasten, Ere the storm its fury stills,

Helmet-like themselves will fasten

On the heads of towering hills.

What, if through the frozen centre

Of the Alps the Chamois bound,

Yet he has a home to enter

In some nook of chosen ground:

And the Sea-horse, though the ocean

Yield him no domestic cave,

Slumbers without sense of motion,

Couched upon the rocking wave.

If on windy days the Raven

Gambol like a dancing skiff,

Not the less she loves her haven

In the bosom of the cliff.

The fleet Ostrich, till day closes,

Vagrant over desert sands,

Brooding on her eggs reposes

When chill night that care demands.

Day and night my toils redouble,

Never nearer to the goal;

Night and day, I feel the trouble

Of the Wanderer in my soul.

William Wordsworth





Sparrow's Nest, The

Behold, within the leafy shade,

Those bright blue eggs together laid!

On me the chance-discovered sight

Gleamed like a vision of delight.

I started---seeming to espy

The home and sheltered bed,

The Sparrow's dwelling, which, hard by My Father' house, in wet or dry

My sister Emmeline and I

Together visited.

She looked at it and seemed to fear it; Dreading, tho' wishing, to be near it: Such heart was in her, being then

A little Prattler among men.

The Blessing of my later year

Was with me when a boy:

She gave me eyes, she gave me ears;

And humble care, and delicate fears;

A heart, the fountain of sweet tears; And love, and thought, and joy.

William Wordsworth





Speak!

WHY art thou silent! Is thy love a plant Of such weak fibre that the treacherous air Of absence withers what was once so fair?

Is there no debt to pay, no boon to grant?

Yet have my thoughts for thee been vigilant--

Bound to thy service with unceasing care, The mind's least generous wish a mendicant For nought but what thy happiness could spare.

Speak--though this soft warm heart, once free to hold A thousand tender pleasures, thine and mine, Be left more desolate, more dreary cold Than a forsaken bird's-nest filled with snow

'Mid its own bush of leafless eglantine--

Speak, that my torturing doubts their end may know!

William Wordsworth





Stanzas

WITHIN our happy castle there dwelt One Whom without blame I may not overlook; For never sun on living creature shone Who more devout enjoyment with us took: Here on his hours he hung as on a book, On his own time here would he float away, As doth a fly upon a summer brook;

But go tomorrow, or belike today,

Seek for him,---he is fled; and whither none can say.

Thus often would he leave our peaceful home, And find elsewhere his business or delight; Out of our Valley's limit did he roam: Full many a time, upon a stormy night, His voice came to us from the neighbouring height: Oft could we see him driving full in view At mid-day when the sun was shining bright; What ill was on him, what he had to do, A mighty wonder bred among our quiet crew.

Ah! piteous sight it was to see this Man When he came back to us, a withered flower,---

Or like a sinful creature, pale and wan.

Down would he sit; and without strength or power Look at the common grass from hour to hour: And oftentimes, how long I fear to say, Where apple-trees in blossom made a bower, Retired in that sunshiny shade he lay; And, like a naked Indian, slept himself away.

Great wonder to our gentle tribe it was Whenever from our Valley he withdrew; For happier soul no living creature has Than he had, beiug here the long day through.

Some thought he was a lover, and did woo: Some thought far worse of him, and judged him wrong; But verse was what he had been wedded to; And his own mind did like a tempest strong Come to him thus, and drove the weary Wight along.

With him there often walked in friendly guise, Or lay upon the moss by brook or tree, A noticeable Man with large grey eyes, And a pale face that seemed undoubtedly As if a blooming face it ought to be; Heavy his low-hung lip did oft appear, Deprest by weight of musing Phantasy; Profound his forehead was, though not severe; Yet some did think that he had little business here: Sweet heaven forfend! his was a lawful right; Noisy he was, and gamesome as a boy;





His limbs would toss about him with delight Like branches when strong winds the trees annoy.

Nor lacked his calmer hours device or toy To banish listlessness and irksome care; He would have taught you how you might employ Yourself; and many did to him repair,---

And certes not in vain; he had inventions rare.

Expedients, too, of simplest sort he tried: Long blades of grass, plucked round him as he lay, Made, to his ear attentively applied, A pipe on which the wind would deftly play; Glasses he had, that little things display, The beetle panoplied in gems and gold, A mailed angel on a battle-day;

The mysteries that cups of flowers enfold, And all the gorgeous sights which fairies do behold.

He would entice that other Man to hear His music, and to view his imagery:

And, sooth, these two were each to the other dear: No livelier love in such a place could be: There did they dwellÑfrom earthly labour free, As happy spirits as were ever seen;

If but a bird, to keep them company,

Or butterfly sate down, they were, I ween, As pleased as if the same had been a Maiden-queen.

William Wordsworth





Stepping Westward

"What, you are stepping westward?"--"Yea."

---'T would be a wildish destiny,

If we, who thus together roam

In a strange land, and far from home, Were in this place the guests of Chance: Yet who would stop, or fear to advance, Though home or shelter he had none,

With such a sky to lead him on?

The dewy ground was dark and cold;

Behind, all gloomy to behold;

And stepping westward seemed to be

A kind of heavenly destiny:

I liked the greeting; 't was a sound

Of something without place or bound;

And seemed to give me spiritual right To travel through that region bright.

The voice was soft, and she who spake Was walking by her native lake:

The salutation had to me

The very sound of courtesy:

Its power was felt; and while my eye

Was fixed upon the glowing sky,

The echo of the voice enwrought

A human sweetness with the thought

Of travelling through the world that lay Before me in my endless way.

William Wordsworth





Strange Fits Of Passion

STRANGE fits of passion have I known: And I will dare to tell,

But in the lover's ear alone,

What once to me befell.

When she I loved looked every day

Fresh as a rose in June,

I to her cottage bent my way,

Beneath an evening-moon.

Upon the moon I fixed my eye,

All over the wide lea;

With quickening pace my horse drew nigh Those paths so dear to me.

And now we reached the orchard-plot;

And, as we climbed the hill,

The sinking moon to Lucy's cot

Came near, and nearer still.

In one of those sweet dreams I slept, Kind Nature's gentlest boon!

And all the while my eye I kept

On the descending moon.

My horse moved on; hoof after hoof

He raised, and never stopped:

When down behind the cottage roof,

At once, the bright moon dropped.

What fond and wayward thoughts will slide Into a Lover's head!

'O mercy!' to myself I cried,

'If Lucy hould be dead!'

William Wordsworth





Strange Fits of Passion Have I Known

Strange fits of passion have I known: And I will dare to tell,

But in the lover's ear alone,

What once to me befell.

When she I loved looked every day

Fresh as a rose in June,

I to her cottage bent my way,

Beneath an evening-moon.

Upon the moon I fixed my eye,

All over the wide lea;

With quickening pace my horse drew nigh Those paths so dear to me.

And now we reached the orchard-plot;

And, as we climbed the hill,

The sinking moon to Lucy's cot

Came near, and nearer still.

In one of those sweet dreams I slept, Kind Nature's gentlest boon!

And all the while my eye I kept

On the descending moon.

My horse moved on; hoof after hoof

He raised, and never stopped:

When down behind the cottage roof,

At once, the bright moon dropped.

What fond and wayward thoughts will slide Into a Lover's head!

"O mercy!" to myself I cried,

"If Lucy hould be dead!"

William Wordsworth





Surprised by Joy

Surprised By Joy

Surprised by joy — impatient as the Wind I turned to share the transport--Oh! with whom But Thee, deep buried in the silent tomb, That spot which no vicissitude can find?

Love, faithful love, recalled thee to my mind--

But how could I forget thee? Through what power, Even for the least division of an hour, Have I been so beguiled as to be blind To my most grievous loss?--That thought's return Was the worst pang that sorrow ever bore, Save one, one only, when I stood forlorn, Knowing my heart's best treasure was no more; That neither present time, nor years unborn Could to my sight that heavenly face restore.

William Wordsworth





Table Turned, The

Up! up! my Friend, and quit your books; Or surely you'll grow double:

Up! up! my Friend, and clear your looks; Why all this toil and trouble?

The sun, above the mountain's head,

A freshening lustre mellow

Through all the long green fields has spread, His first sweet evening yellow.

Books! 'tis a dull and endless strife: Come, hear the woodland linnet,

How sweet his music! on my life,

There's more of wisdom in it.

And hark! how blithe the throstle sings!

He, too, is no mean preacher:

Come forth into the light of things,

Let Nature be your teacher.

She has a world of ready wealth,

Our minds and hearts to bless--

Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health, Truth breathed by cheerfulness.

One impulse from a vernal wood

May teach you more of man,

Of moral evil and of good,

Than all the sages can.

Sweet is the lore which Nature brings; Our meddling intellect

Mis-shapes the beauteous forms of things:--

We murder to dissect.

Enough of Science and of Art;

Close up those barren leaves;

Come forth, and bring with you a heart That watches and receives.

William Wordsworth





The Complaint Of a Forsaken Indian Woman Before I see another day,

Oh let my body die away!

In sleep I heard the northern gleams; The stars, they were among my dreams; In rustling conflict through the skies, I heard, I saw the flashes drive,

And yet they are upon my eyes,

And yet I am alive;

Before I see another day,

Oh let my body die away!

My fire is dead: it knew no pain;

Yet is it dead, and I remain:

All stiff with ice the ashes lie;

And they are dead, and I will die.

When I was well, I wished to live,

For clothes, for warmth, for food, and fire; But they to me no joy can give,

No pleasure now, and no desire.

Then here contented will I lie

Alone, I cannot fear to die.

Alas! ye might have dragged me on

Another day, a single one!

Too soon I yielded to despair;

Why did ye listen to my prayer

When ye were gone my limb were stronger; And oh, how grievously I rue,

That, afterward, a little longer,

My friends, I did not follow you!

For strong and without pain I lay,

Dear friends, when ye were gone away.

My Child! they gave thee to another,

A woman who was not thy mother.

When from my arms my Babe they took,

On me how strangely did he look !

Through his whole body something ran, A most strange working did I see;

---As if he strove to be a man,

That he might pull the sledge for me: And then he stretched his arm, how wild!

Oh mercy! like a helpless child.

My little joy! my little pride!

In two day more I must have died.

Then do not weep and grieve for me;

I feel I must have died with thee.

O wind, that o'er my head art flying

The way my friends their course did bend, I should not feel the pain of dying,

Could I with thee a message end;





Too soon, my friend, ye went away;

For I had many thing to say.

I'll follow you across the snow;

Ye travel heavily and slow;

In spite of all my weary pain

I'll look upon your tent again.

---My fire is dead, and snowy white

The water which beside it stood:

The wolf has come to me to-night,

And he has stolen away my food.

Forever left alone am I;

Then wherefore should I fear to die ?

Young as I am, my course is run,

I shall not see another sun;

I cannot lift my limb to know

If they have any life or no.

My poor forsaken child, if I

For once could have thee close to me, With happy heart I then would die,

And my last thought would happy be;

But thou, dear Babe, art far away,

Nor shall I see another day.

William Wordsworth





The Forsaken

The peace which other seek they find; The heaviest storms not longet last;

Heaven grants even to the guiltiest mind An amnesty for what is past;

When will my sentence be reversed?

I only pray to know the worst;

And wish as if my heart would burst.

O weary struggle! silent year

Tell seemingly no doubtful tale;

And yet they leave it short, and fear And hopes are strong and will prevail.

My calmest faith escapes not pain;

And, feeling that the hope in vain,

I think that he will come again.

William Wordsworth





The Fountain

<i>A Conversation</i>

We talked with open heart, and tongue Affectionate and true,

A pair of friends, though I was young, And Matthew seventy-two.

We lay beneath a spreading oak,

Beside a mossy seat;

And from the turf a fountain broke

And gurgled at our feet.

`Now, Matthew!' said I, `let us match This water's pleasant tune

With some old border-song, or catch

That suits a summer's noon;

Òr of the church-clock and the chimes Sing here beneath the shade

That half-mad thing of witty rhymes

Which you last April made!'

In silence Matthew lay, and eyed

The spring beneath the tree;

And thus the dear old man replied,

The grey-haired man of glee:

`No check, no stay, this streamlet fears, How merrily it goes!

'Twill murmur on a thousand years

And flow as now it flows.

Ànd here, on this delightful day,

I cannot choose but think

How oft, a vigorous man, I lay

Beside this fountain's brink.

`My eyes are dim with childish tears, My heart is idly stirred,

For the same sound is in my ears

Which in those days I heard.

`Thus fares it still in our decay:

And yet the wiser mind

Mourns less for what Age takes away,

Than what it leaves behind.

`The blackbird amid leafy trees,

The lark above the hill,

Let loose their carols when they please, Are quiet when they will.





`With Nature never do they wage

A foolish strife; they see

A happy youth, and their old age

Is beautiful and free:

`But we are pressed by heavy laws;

And often, glad no more,

We wear a face of joy, because

We have been glad of yore.

Ìf there be one who need bemoan

His kindred laid in earth,

The household hearts that were his own, -

It is the man of mirth.

`My days, my friend, are almost gone, My life has been approved,

And many love me; but by none

Am I enough beloved.'

`Now both himself and me he wrongs,

The man who thus complains!

I live and sing my idle songs

Upon these happy plains:

Ànd, Matthew, for thy children dead

I'll be a son to thee!'

At this he grasped my hand and said

Àlas! that cannot be.'

We rose up from the fountain-side;

And down the smooth descent

Of the green sheep-track did we glide; And through the wood we went;

And ere we came to Leonard's Rock

He sang those witty rhymes

About the crazy old church-clock,

And the bewildered chimes.

William Wordsworth





The French Revolution as it appeared to Enthusiasts

. Oh! pleasant exercise of hope and joy!

For mighty were the auxiliars which then stood Upon our side, we who were strong in love!

Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, But to be young was very heaven!--Oh! times, In which the meagre, stale, forbidding ways Of custom, law, and statute, took at once The attraction of a country in romance!

When Reason seemed the most to assert her rights, When most intent on making of herself A prime Enchantress--to assist the work Which then was going forward in her name!

Not favoured spots alone, but the whole earth, The beauty wore of promise, that which sets (As at some moment might not be unfelt Among the bowers of paradise itself ) The budding rose above the rose full blown.

What temper at the prospect did not wake To happiness unthought of? The inert

Were roused, and lively natures rapt away!

They who had fed their childhood upon dreams, The playfellows of fancy, who had made All powers of swiftness, subtilty, and strength Their ministers,--who in lordly wise had stirred Among the grandest objects of the sense, And dealt with whatsoever they found there As if they had within some lurking right To wield it;--they, too, who, of gentle mood, Had watched all gentle motions, and to these Had fitted their own thoughts, schemers more wild, And in the region of their peaceful selves;--

Now was it that both found, the meek and lofty Did both find, helpers to their heart's desire, And stuff at hand, plastic as they could wish; Wcre called upon to exercise their skill, Not in Utopia, subterranean fields,

Or some secreted island, Heaven knows where!

But in the very world, which is the world Of all of us,--the place where in the end We find our happiness, or not at all!

William Wordsworth





The Green Linnet

BENEATH these fruit-tree boughs that shed Their snow-white blossoms on my head, With brightest sunshine round me spread Of spring's unclouded weather,

In this sequestered nook how sweet

To sit upon my orchard-seat!

And birds and flowers once more to greet, My last year's friends together.

One have I marked, the happiest guest In all this covert of the blest:

Hail to Thee, far above the rest

In joy of voice and pinion!

Thou, Linnet! in thy green array,

Presiding Spirit here today,

Dost lead the revels of the May;

And this is thy dominion.

While bird, and butterflies, and flowers, Make all one band of paramours,

Thou, ranging up and down the bowers, Art sole in thy employment:

A Life, a Presence like the Air,

Scattering thy gladness without care, Too blest with any one to pair;

Thyself thy own enjoyment.

Amid yon tuft of hazel trees,

That twinkle to the gusty breeze,

Behold him perched in ecstasies,

Yet seeming still to hover;

There! where the flutter of his wings Upon his back and body flings

Shadows and sunny glimmerings,

That cover him all over.

My dazzled sight he oft deceives,

A Brother of the dancing leaves;

Then flits, and from the cottage eaves Pours forth his song in gushes;

As if by that exulting strain

He mocked and treated with disdain

The voiceless Form he chose to feign, While fluttering in the bushes.

William Wordsworth





The Idle Shepherd Boys

The valley rings with mirth and joy;

Among the hills the echoes play

A never never ending song,

To welcome in the May.

The magpie chatters with delight;

The mountain raven's youngling brood

Have left the mother and the nest;

And they go rambling east and west

In search of their own food;

Or through the glittering vapors dart In very wantonness of heart.

Beneath a rock, upon the grass,

Two boys are sitting in the sun;

Their work, if any work they have,

Is out of mind---or done.

On pipes of sycamore they play

The fragments of a Christmas hymn;

Or with that plant which in our dale

We call stag-horn, or fox's tail,

Their rusty hats they trim:

And thus, as happy as the day,

Those Shepherds wear the time away.

Along the river's stony marge

The sand-lark chants a joyous song;

The thrush is busy in the wood,

And carols loud and strong.

A thousand lambs are on the rocks,

All newly born! both earth and sky

Keep jubilee, and more than all,

Those boys with their green coronal;

They never hear the cry,

That plaintive cry! which up the hill Comes from the depth of Dungeon-Ghyll.

Said Walter, leaping from the ground,

'Down to the stump of yon old yew

We'll for our whistles run a race.'

Away the shepherds flew;

They leapt---they ran---and when they came Right opposite to Dungeon-Ghyll,

Seeing that he should lose the prize,

'Stop! ' to his comrade Walter cries---

James stopped with no good will:

Said Walter then, exulting; 'Here

You'll find a task for half a year.

Cross, if you dare, where I shall cross---

Come on, and tread where I shall tread.'

The other took him at his word,

And followed as he led.





It was a spot which you may see

If ever you to Langdale go;

Into a chasm a mighty block

Hath fallen, and made a bridge of rock: The gulf is deep below;

And, in a basin black and small,

Receives a lofty waterfall.

With staff in hand across the cleft

The challenger pursued his march;

And now, all eyes and feet, hath gained The middle of the arch.

When list! he hears a piteous moan---

Again !---his heart within him dies---

His pulse is stopped, his breath is lost, He totters, pallid as a ghost,

And, looking down, espies

A lamb, that in the pool is pent

Within that black and frightful rent.

The lamb had slipped into the stream, And safe without a bruise or wound

The cataract had borne him down

Into the gulf profound.

His dam had seen him when he fell,

She saw him down the torrent borne;

And, while with all a mother's love

She from the lofty rocks above

Sent forth a cry forlorn,

The lamb, still swimming round and round, Made answer to that plaintive sound.

When he had learnt what thing it was, That sent this rueful cry; I ween

The Boy recovered heart, and told

The sight which he had seen.

Both gladly now deferred their task;

Nor was there wanting other aid---

A Poet, one who loves the brooks

Far better than the sages' books,

By chance had thither strayed;

And there the helpless lamb he found

By those huge rocks encompassed round.

He drew it from the troubled pool,

And brought it forth into the light:

The Shepherds met him with his charge, An unexpected sight!

Into their arms the lamb they took,

Whose life and limbs the flood had spared; Then up the steep ascent they hied,

And placed him at his mother's side;





And gently did the Bard

Those idle Shepherd-Boys upbraid,

And bade them better mind their trade.

William Wordsworth





The Kitten And Falling Leaves

THAT way look, my Infant, lo!

What a pretty baby-show!

See the kitten on the wall,

Sporting with the leaves that fall,

Withered leaves---one---two---and three---

From the lofty elder-tree!

Through the calm and frosty air

Of this morning bright and fair,

Eddying round and round they sink

Softly, slowly: one might think,

From the motions that are made,

Every little leaf conveyed

Sylph or Faery hither tending,---

To this lower world descending,

Each invisible and mute,

In his wavering parachute.

---But the Kitten, how she starts,

Crouches, stretches, paws, and darts!

First at one, and then its fellow

Just as light and just as yellow;

There are many now---now one---

Now they stop and there are none

What intenseness of desire

In her upward eye of fire!

With a tiger-leap half way

Now she meets the coming prey,

Lets it go as fast, and then

Has it in her power again:

Now she works with three or four,

Like an Indian conjurer;

Quick as he in feats of art,

Far beyond in joy of heart.

Were her antics played in the eye

Of a thousand standers-by,

Clapping hands with shout and stare,

What would little Tabby care

For the plaudits of the crowd?

Over happy to be proud,

Over wealthy in the treasure

Of her own exceeding pleasure!

'Tis a pretty baby-treat;

Nor, I deem, for me unmeet;

Here, for neither Babe nor me,

Other play-mate can I see.

Of the countless living things,

That with stir of feet and wings

(In the sun or under shade,

Upon bough or grassy blade)

And with busy revellings,

Chirp and song, and murmurings,

Made this orchard's narrow space,

And this vale so blithe a place;





Multitudes are swept away

Never more to breathe the day:

Some are sleeping; some in bands

Travelled into distant lands;

Others slunk to moor and wood,

Far from human neighborhood;

And, among the Kinds that keep

With us closer fellowship,

With us openly abide,

All have laid their mirth aside.

Where is he that giddy Sprite,

Blue-cap, with his colors bright,

Who was blest as bird could be,

Feeding in the apple-tree;

Made such wanton spoil and rout,

Turning blossoms inside out;

Hung---head pointing towards the ground---

Fluttered, perched, into a round

Bound himself, and then unbound;

Lithest, gaudiest Harlequin!

Prettiest Tumbler ever seen!

Light of heart and light of limb;

What is now become of Him?

Lambs, that through the mountains went Frisking, bleating merriment,

When the year was in its prime,

They are sobered by this time.

If you look to vale or hill,

If you listen, all is still,

Save a little neighboring rill,

That from out the rocky ground

Strikes a solitary sound.

Vainly glitter hill and plain,

And the air is calm in vain;

Vainly Morning spreads the lure

Of a sky serene and pure;

Creature none can she decoy

Into open sign of joy:

Is it that they have a fear

Of the dreary season near?

Or that other pleasures be

Sweeter even than gaiety ?

Yet, whate'er enjoyments dwell

In the impenetrable cell

Of the silent heart which Nature

Furnishes to every creature;

Whatsoe'er we feel and know

Too sedate for outward show,

Such a light of gladness breaks,

Pretty Kitten! from thy freaks,---

Spreads with such a living grace

O'er my little Dora's face;





Yes, the sight so stirs and charms

Thee, Baby, laughing in my arms,

That almost I could repine

That your transports are not mine,

That I do not wholly fare

Even as ye do, thoughtless pair!

And I will have my careless season

Spite of melancholy reason,

Will walk through life in such a way

That, when time brings on decay,

Now and then I may possess

Hours of perfect gladsomeness.

---Pleased by any random toy;

By a kitten's busy joy,

Or an infant's laughing eye

Sharing in the ecstasy;

I would fare like that or this,

Find my wisdom in my bliss;

Keep the sprightly soul awake,

And have faculties to take,

Even from things by sorrow wrought,

Matter for a jocund thought,

Spite of care, and spite of grief,

To gambol with Life's falling Leaf.

William Wordsworth





The Longest Day

Let us quit the leafy arbor,

And the torrent murmuring by;

For the sun is in his harbor,

Weary of the open sky.

Evening now unbinds the fetters

Fashioned by the glowing light;

All that breathe are thankful debtors To the harbinger of night.

Yet by some grave thoughts attended

Eve renews her calm career;

For the day that now is ended,

Is the longest of the year.

Dora! sport, as now thou sportest,

On this platform, light and free;

Take thy bliss, while longest, shortest, Are indifferent to thee!

Who would check the happy feeling

That inspires the linnet's song?

Who would stop the swallow, wheeling

On her pinions swift and strong?

Yet at this impressive season,

Words which tenderness can speak

From the truths of homely reason,

Might exalt the loveliest cheek;

And, while shades to shades succeeding Steal the landscape from the sight,

I would urge this moral pleading,

Last forerunner of "Good night!"

Summer ebbs; -- each day that follows Is a reflux from on high,

Tending to the darksome hollows

Where the frosts of winter lie.

He who governs the creation,

In his providence, assigned

Such a gradual declination

To the life of human kind.

Yet we mark it not; -- fruits redden, Fresh flowers blow, as flowers have blown, And the heart is loth to deaden

Hopes that she so long hath known.

Be thou wiser, youthful Maiden!

And when thy decline shall come,





Let not dowers, or boughs fruit-laden, Hide the knowledge of thy doom.

Now, even now, ere wrapped in slumber, Fix thine eyes upon the sea

That absorbs time, space, and number; Look thou to Eternity!

Follow thou the flowing river

On whose breast are thither borne

All deceived, and each deceiver,

Through the gates of night and morn;

Through the year's successive portals; Through the bounds which many a star

Marks, not mindless of frail mortals, When his light returns from far.

Thus when thou with Time hast travelled Toward the mighty gulf of things,

And the mazy stream unravelled

With thy best imaginings;

Think, if thou on beauty leanest,

Think how pitiful that stay,

Did not virtue give the meanest

Charms superior to decay.

Duty, like a strict preceptor,

Sometimes frowns, or seems to frown;

Choose her thistle for thy sceptre,

While youth's roses are thy crown.

Grasp it, -- if thou shrink and tremble, Fairest damsel of the green,

Thou wilt lack the only symbol

That proclaims a genuine queen;

And ensures those palms of honor

Which selected spirits wear,

Bending low before the Donor,

Lord of heaven's unchanging year!

William Wordsworth





The Mother's Return

A MONTH, sweet Little-ones, is past

Since your dear Mother went away,---

And she tomorrow will return;

Tomorrow is the happy day.

O blessed tidings! thought of joy!

The eldest heard with steady glee;

Silent he stood; then laughed amain,---

And shouted, ' Mother, come to me!'

Louder and louder did he shout,

With witless hope to bring her near;

'Nay, patience! patience, little boy!

Your tender mother cannot hear.'

I told of hills, and far-off town,

And long, long vale to travel through;---

He listens, puzzled, sore perplexed,

But he submits; what can he do ?

No strife disturbs his sister's breast; She wars not with the mystery

Of time and distance, night and day;

The bonds of our humanity.

Her joy is like an instinct, joy

Of kitten, bird, or summer fly;

She dances, runs without an aim,

She chatters in her ecstasy.

Her brother now takes up the note,

And echoes back his sister's glee;

They hug the infant in my arms,

As if to force his sympathy.

Then, settling into fond discourse,

We rested in the garden bower;

While sweetly shone the evening sun

In his departing hour.

We told o'er all that we had done,---

Our rambles by the swift brook's side Far as the willow-skirted pool,

Where two fair swans together glide.

We talked of change, of winter gone,

Of green leaves on the hawthorn spray, Of birds that build their nests and sing And all 'since Mother went away!'

To her these tales they will repeat,

To her our new-born tribes will show,





The goslings green, the ass's colt,

The lambs that in the meadow go.

---But, see, the evening star comes forth!

To bed the children must depart;

A moment's heaviness they feel,

A sadness at the heart;

'Tis gone---and in a merry fit

They run up stairs in gamesome race;

I, too, infected by their mood,

I could have joined the wanton chase.

Five minutes past---and, O the change!

Asleep upon their beds they lie;

Their buy limbs in perfect rest,

And closed the sparkling eye.

William Wordsworth





The Old Cumberland Beggar

. I saw an aged Beggar in my walk;

And he was seated, by the highway side, On a low structure of rude masonry

Built at the foot of a huge hill, that they Who lead their horses down the steep rough road May thence remount at ease. The aged Man Had placed his staff across the broad smooth stone That overlays the pile; and, from a bag All white with flour, the dole of village dames, He drew his scraps and fragments, one by one; And scanned them with a fixed and serious look Of idle computation. In the sun,

Upon the second step of that small pile, Surrounded by those wild, unpeopled hills, He sat, and ate his food in solitude: And ever, scattered from his palsied hand, That, still attempting to prevent the waste, Was baffled still, the crumbs in little showers Fell on the ground; and the small mountain birds Not venturing yet to peck their destined meal, Approached within the length of half his staff.

Him from my childhood have I known; and then He was so old, he seems not older now; He travels on, a solitary Man,

So helpless in appearance, that from him The sauntering Horseman throws not with a slack And careless hand his alms upon the ground, But stops,--that he may safely lodge the coin Within the old Man's hat; nor quits him so, But still, when he has given his horse the rein, Watches the aged Beggar with a look

Sidelong, and half-reverted. She who tends The toll-gate, when in summer at her door She turns her wheel, if on the road she sees The aged Beggar coming, quits her work, And lifts the latch for him that he may pass.

The post-boy, when his rattling wheels o'ertake The aged Beggar in the woody lane,

Shouts to him from behind; and if, thus warned, The old Man does not change his course, the boy Turns with less noisy wheels to the roadside, And passes gently by, without a curse Upon his lips, or anger at his heart.

He travels on, a solitary Man;

His age has no companion. On the ground His eyes are turned, and, as he moves along, They move along the ground; and, evermore, Instead of common and habitual sight

Of fields, with rural works, of hill and dale, And the blue sky, one little span of earth Is all his prospect. Thus, from day to day, Bow-bent, his eyes forever on the ground,





He plies his weary journey; seeing still, And seldom knowing that he sees, some straw, Some scattered leaf, or marks which, in one track, The nails of cart or chariot-wheel have left Impressed on the white road,--in the same line, At distance still the same. Poor Traveller!

His staff trails with him; scarcely do his feet Disturb the summer dust; he is so still In look and motion, that the cottage curs, Ere he has passed the door, will turn away, Weary of barking at him. Boys and girls, The vacant and the busy, maids and youths, And urchins newly breeched--all pass him by: Him even the slow-paced waggon leaves behind.

But deem not this Man useless.--Statesmen! ye Who are so restless in your wisdom, ye Who have a broom still ready in your hands To rid the world of nuisances; ye proud, Heart-swoln, while in your pride ye contemplate Your talents, power, or wisdom, deem him not A burden of the earth! 'Tis Nature's law That none, the meanest of created things, Of forms created the most vile and brute, The dullest or most noxious, should exist Divorced from good--a spirit and pulse of good, A life and soul, to every mode of being Inseparably linked. Then be assured

That least of all can aught--that ever owned The heaven-regarding eye and front sublime Which man is born to--sink, howe'er depressed, So low as to be scorned without a sin; Without offence to God cast out of view; Like the dry remnant of a garden-flower Whose seeds are shed, or as an implement Worn out and worthless. While from door to door, This old Man creeps, the villagers in him Behold a record which together binds

Past deeds and offices of charity,

Else unremembered, and so keeps alive The kindly mood in hearts which lapse of years, And that half-wisdom half-experience gives, Make slow to feel, and by sure steps resign To selfishness and cold oblivious cares, Among the farms and solitary huts,

Hamlets and thinly-scattered villages, Where'er the aged Beggar takes his rounds, The mild necessity of use compels

The acts of love; and habit does the work Of reason; yet prepares that after-joy Which reason cherishes. And thus the soul, By that sweet taste of pleasure unpursued, Doth find herself insensibly disposed





To virtue and true goodness.

Some there are

By their good works exalted, lofty minds And meditative, authors of delight

And happiness, which to the end of time Will live, and spread, and kindle: even such minds In childhood, from this solitary Being, Or from like wanderer, haply have received (A thing more precious far than all that books Or the solicitudes of love can do!)

That first mild touch of sympathy and thought, In which they found their kindred with a world Where want and sorrow were. The easy man Who sits at his own door,--and, like the pear That overhangs his head from the green wall, Feeds in the sunshine; the robust and young, The prosperous and unthinking, they who live Sheltered, and flourish in a little grove Of their own kindred;--all behold in him A silent monitor, which on their minds Must needs impress a transitory thought Of self-congratulation, to the heart

Of each recalling his peculiar boons, His charters and exemptions; and, perchance, Though he to no one give the fortitude And circumspection needful to preserve His present blessings, and to husband up The respite of the season, he, at least, And 't is no vulgar service, makes them felt.

Yet further.--Many, I believe, there are Who live a life of virtuous decency,

Men who can hear the Decalogue and feel No self-reproach; who of the moral law Established in the land where they abide Are strict observers; and not negligent In acts of love to those with whom they dwell, Their kindred, and the children of their blood.

Praise be to such, and to their slumbers peace!

But of the poor man ask, the abject poor; Go, and demand of him, if there be here In this cold abstinence from evil deeds, And these inevitable charities,

Wherewith to satisfy the human soul?





No--man is dear to man; the poorest poor Long for some moments in a weary life When they can know and feel that they have been, Themselves, the fathers and the dealers-out Of some small blessings; have been kind to such As needed kindness, for this single cause, That we have all of us one human heart.

--Such pleasure is to one kind Being known, My neighbour, when with punctual care, each week Duly as Friday comes, though pressed herself By her own wants, she from her store of meal Takes one unsparing handful for the scrip Of this old Mendicant, and, from her door Returning with exhilarated heart,

Sits by her fire, and builds her hope in heaven.

Then let him pass, a blessing on his head!

And while in that vast solitude to which The tide of things has borne him, he appears To breathe and live but for himself alone, Unblamed, uninjured, let him bear about The good which the benignant law of Heaven Has hung around him: and, while life is his, Still let him prompt the unlettered villagers To tender offices and pensive thoughts.

--Then let him pass, a blessing on his head!

And, long as he can wander, let him breathe The freshness of the valleys; let his blood Struggle with frosty air and winter snows; And let the chartered wind that sweeps the heath Beat his grey locks against his withered face.

Reverence the hope whose vital anxiousness Gives the last human interest to his heart.

May never HOUSE, misnamed of INDUSTRY, Make him a captive!--for that pent-up din, Those life-consuming sounds that clog the air, Be his the natural silence of old age!

Let him be free of mountain solitudes; And have around him, whether heard or not, The pleasant melody of woodland birds.

Few are his pleasures: if his eyes have now Been doomed so long to settle upon earth That not without some effort they behold The countenance of the horizontal sun, Rising or setting, let the light at least Find a free entrance to their languid orbs.

And let him, where and when he will, sit down Beneath the trees, or on a grassy bank Of highway side, and with the little birds Share his chance-gathered meal; and, finally,





As in the eye of Nature he has lived, So in the eye of Nature let him die!

William Wordsworth





The Power of Armies Is a Visible Thing The power of Armies is a visible thing, Formal, and circumscribed in time and space; But who the limits of that power shall trace Which a brave People into light can bring Or hide, at will,--for freedom combating By just revenge inflamed? No foot may chase, No eye can follow, to a fatal place

That power, that spirit, whether on the wing Like the strong wind, or sleeping like the wind Within its awful caves.--From year to year Springs this indigenous produce far and near; No craft this subtle element can bind, Rising like water from the soil, to find In every nook a lip that it may cheer.

William Wordsworth






--Was it for this

That one, the fairest of all Rivers, lov'd To blend his murmurs with my Nurse's song, And from his alder shades and rocky falls, And from his fords and shallows, sent a voice That flow'd along my dreams? For this, didst Thou, O Derwent! travelling over the green Plains Near my 'sweet Birthplace', didst thou, beauteous Stream Make ceaseless music through the night and day Which with its steady cadence, tempering Our human waywardness, compos'd my thoughts To more than infant softness, giving me, Among the fretful dwellings of mankind, A knowledge, a dim earnest, of the calm That Nature breathes among the hills and groves.

When, having left his Mountains, to the Towers Of Cockermouth that beauteous River came, Behind my Father's House he pass'd, close by, Along the margin of our Terrace Walk.

He was a Playmate whom we dearly lov'd.

Oh! many a time have I, a five years' Child, A naked Boy, in one delightful Rill,

A little Mill-race sever'd from his stream, Made one long bathing of a summer's day, Bask'd in the sun, and plunged, and bask'd again Alternate all a summer's day, or cours'd Over the sandy fields, leaping through groves Of yellow grunsel, or when crag and hill, The woods, and distant Skiddaw's lofty height, Were bronz'd with a deep radiance, stood alone Beneath the sky, as if I had been born On Indian Plains, and from my Mother's hut Had run abroad in wantonness, to sport, A naked Savage, in the thunder shower.

Fair seed-time had my soul, and I grew up Foster'd alike by beauty and by fear; Much favour'd in my birthplace, and no less In that beloved Vale to which, erelong, I was transplanted. Well I call to mind ('Twas at an early age, ere I had seen Nine summers) when upon the mountain slope The frost and breath of frosty wind had snapp'd The last autumnal crocus, 'twas my joy To wander half the night among the Cliffs And the smooth Hollows, where the woodcocks ran Along the open turf. In thought and wish That time, my shoulder all with springes hung, I was a fell destroyer. On the heights Scudding away from snare to snare, I plied My anxious visitation, hurrying on,





Still hurrying, hurrying onward; moon and stars Were shining o'er my head; I was alone, And seem'd to be a trouble to the peace That was among them. Sometimes it befel In these night-wanderings, that a strong desire O'erpower'd my better reason, and the bird Which was the captive of another's toils Became my prey; and, when the deed was done I heard among the solitary hills

Low breathings coming after me, and sounds Of undistinguishable motion, steps

Almost as silent as the turf they trod.

Nor less in springtime when on southern banks The shining sun had from his knot of leaves Decoy'd the primrose flower, and when the Vales And woods were warm, was I a plunderer then In the high places, on the lonesome peaks Where'er, among the mountains and the winds, The Mother Bird had built her lodge. Though mean My object, and inglorious, yet the end Was not ignoble. Oh! when I have hung Above the raven's nest, by knots of grass And half-inch fissures in the slippery rock But ill sustain'd, and almost, as it seem'd, Suspended by the blast which blew amain, Shouldering the naked crag; Oh! at that time, While on the perilous ridge I hung alone, With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind Blow through my ears! the sky seem'd not a sky Of earth, and with what motion mov'd the clouds!

The mind of Man is fram'd even like the breath And harmony of music. There is a dark Invisible workmanship that reconciles Discordant elements, and makes them move In one society. Ah me! that all

The terrors, all the early miseries

Regrets, vexations, lassitudes, that all The thoughts and feelings which have been infus'd Into my mind, should ever have made up The calm existence that is mine when I Am worthy of myself! Praise to the end!

Thanks likewise for the means! But I believe That Nature, oftentimes, when she would frame A favor'd Being, from his earliest dawn Of infancy doth open out the clouds,

As at the touch of lightning, seeking him With gentlest visitation; not the less, Though haply aiming at the self-same end, Does it delight her sometimes to employ Severer interventions, ministry





More palpable, and so she dealt with me.

One evening (surely I was led by her) I went alone into a Shepherd's Boat,

A Skiff that to a Willow tree was tied Within a rocky Cave, its usual home.

'Twas by the shores of Patterdale, a Vale Wherein I was a Stranger, thither come A School-boy Traveller, at the Holidays.

Forth rambled from the Village Inn alone No sooner had I sight of this small Skiff, Discover'd thus by unexpected chance, Than I unloos'd her tether and embark'd.

The moon was up, the Lake was shining clear Among the hoary mountains; from the Shore I push'd, and struck the oars and struck again In cadence, and my little Boat mov'd on Even like a Man who walks with stately step Though bent on speed. It was an act of stealth And troubled pleasure; not without the voice Of mountain-echoes did my Boat move on, Leaving behind her still on either side Small circles glittering idly in the moon, Until they melted all into one track

Of sparkling light. A rocky Steep uprose Above the Cavern of the Willow tree

And now, as suited one who proudly row'd With his best skill, I fix'd a steady view Upon the top of that same craggy ridge, The bound of the horizon, for behind

Was nothing but the stars and the grey sky.

She was an elfin Pinnace; lustily

I dipp'd my oars into the silent Lake, And, as I rose upon the stroke, my Boat Went heaving through the water, like a Swan; When from behind that craggy Steep, till then The bound of the horizon, a huge Cliff, As if with voluntary power instinct,

Uprear'd its head. I struck, and struck again And, growing still in stature, the huge Cliff Rose up between me and the stars, and still, With measur'd motion, like a living thing, Strode after me. With trembling hands I turn'd, And through the silent water stole my way Back to the Cavern of the Willow tree.

There, in her mooring-place, I left my Bark, And, through the meadows homeward went, with grave And serious thoughts; and after I had seen That spectacle, for many days, my brain Work'd with a dim and undetermin'd sense Of unknown modes of being; in my thoughts





There was a darkness, call it solitude, Or blank desertion, no familiar shapes Of hourly objects, images of trees,

Of sea or sky, no colours of green fields; But huge and mighty Forms that do not live Like living men mov'd slowly through the mind By day and were the trouble of my dreams.

Wisdom and Spirit of the universe!

Thou Soul that art the eternity of thought!

That giv'st to forms and images a breath And everlasting motion! not in vain,

By day or star-light thus from my first dawn Of Childhood didst Thou intertwine for me The passions that build up our human Soul, Not with the mean and vulgar works of Man, But with high objects, with enduring things, With life and nature, purifying thus

The elements of feeling and of thought, And sanctifying, by such discipline,

Both pain and fear, until we recognize A grandeur in the beatings of the heart.

Nor was this fellowship vouchsaf'd to me With stinted kindness. In November days, When vapours, rolling down the valleys, made A lonely scene more lonesome; among woods At noon, and 'mid the calm of summer nights, When, by the margin of the trembling Lake, Beneath the gloomy hills I homeward went In solitude, such intercourse was mine;

'Twas mine among the fields both day and night, And by the waters all the summer long.

And in the frosty season, when the sun Was set, and visible for many a mile

The cottage windows through the twilight blaz'd, I heeded not the summons:--happy time It was, indeed, for all of us; to me

It was a time of rapture: clear and loud The village clock toll'd six; I wheel'd about, Proud and exulting, like an untired horse, That cares not for its home.--All shod with steel, We hiss'd along the polish'd ice, in games Confederate, imitative of the chace

And woodland pleasures, the resounding horn, The Pack loud bellowing, and the hunted hare.

So through the darkness and the cold we flew, And not a voice was idle; with the din,





Meanwhile, the precipices rang aloud, The leafless trees, and every icy crag Tinkled like iron, while the distant hills Into the tumult sent an alien sound

Of melancholy, not unnoticed, while the stars, Eastward, were sparkling clear, and in the west The orange sky of evening died away.

Not seldom from the uproar I retired

Into a silent bay, or sportively

Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng, To cut across the image of a star

That gleam'd upon the ice: and oftentimes When we had given our bodies to the wind, And all the shadowy banks, on either side, Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still The rapid line of motion; then at once Have I, reclining back upon my heels, Stopp'd short, yet still the solitary Cliffs Wheeled by me, even as if the earth had roll'd With visible motion her diurnal round; Behind me did they stretch in solemn train Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watch'd Till all was tranquil as a dreamless sleep.

Ye Presences of Nature, in the sky

And on the earth! Ye Visions of the hills!

And Souls of lonely places! can I think A vulgar hope was yours when Ye employ'd Such ministry, when Ye through many a year Haunting me thus among my boyish sports, On caves and trees, upon the woods and hills, Impress'd upon all forms the characters Of danger or desire, and thus did make The surface of the universal earth

With triumph, and delight, and hope, and fear, Work like a sea? Not uselessly employ'd, I might pursue this theme through every change Of exercise and play, to which the year Did summon us in its delightful round.

We were a noisy crew, the sun in heaven Beheld not vales more beautiful than ours, Nor saw a race in happiness and joy

More worthy of the ground where they were sown.

I would record with no reluctant voice The woods of autumn and their hazel bowers With milk-white clusters hung; the rod and line, True symbol of the foolishness of hope,





Which with its strong enchantment led us on By rocks and pools, shut out from every star All the green summer, to forlorn cascades Among the windings of the mountain brooks.

--Unfading recollections! at this hour The heart is almost mine with which I felt From some hill-top, on sunny afternoons The Kite high up among the fleecy clouds Pull at its rein, like an impatient Courser, Or, from the meadows sent on gusty days, Beheld her breast the wind, then suddenly Dash'd headlong; and rejected by the storm.

Ye lowly Cottages in which we dwelt,

A ministration of your own was yours, A sanctity, a safeguard, and a love!

Can I forget you, being as ye were

So beautiful among the pleasant fields In which ye stood? Or can I here forget The plain and seemly countenance with which Ye dealt out your plain comforts? Yet had ye Delights and exultations of your own.

Eager and never weary we pursued

Our home amusements by the warm peat-fire At evening; when with pencil and with slate, In square divisions parcell'd out, and all With crosses and with cyphers scribbled o'er, We schemed and puzzled, head opposed to head In strife too humble to be named in Verse.

Or round the naked table, snow-white deal, Cherry or maple, sate in close array, And to the combat, Lu or Whist, led on thick-ribbed Army; not as in the world Neglected and ungratefully thrown by

Even for the very service they had wrought, But husbanded through many a long campaign.

Uncouth assemblage was it, where no few Had changed their functions, some, plebeian cards, Which Fate beyond the promise of their birth Had glorified, and call'd to represent The persons of departed Potentates.

Oh! with what echoes on the Board they fell!

Ironic Diamonds, Clubs, Hearts, Diamonds, Spades, A congregation piteously akin.

Cheap matter did they give to boyish wit, Those sooty knaves, precipitated down With scoffs and taunts, like Vulcan out of Heaven, The paramount Ace, a moon in her eclipse, Queens, gleaming through their splendour's last decay, And Monarchs, surly at the wrongs sustain'd By royal visages. Meanwhile, abroad





The heavy rain was falling, or the frost Raged bitterly, with keen and silent tooth, And, interrupting oft the impassion'd game, From Esthwaite's neighbouring Lake the splitting ice, While it sank down towards the water, sent, Among the meadows and the hills, its long And dismal yellings, like the noise of wolves When they are howling round the Bothnic Main.

Nor, sedulous as I have been to trace How Nature by extrinsic passion first Peopled my mind with beauteous forms or grand, And made me love them, may I well forget How other pleasures have been mine, and joys Of subtler origin; how I have felt,

Not seldom, even in that tempestuous time, Those hallow'd and pure motions of the sense Which seem, in their simplicity, to own An intellectual charm, that calm delight Which, if I err not, surely must belong To those first-born affinities that fit Our new existence to existing things, And, in our dawn of being, constitute The bond of union betwixt life and joy.

Yes, I remember, when the changeful earth, And twice five seasons on my mind had stamp'd The faces of the moving year, even then, A Child, I held unconscious intercourse With the eternal Beauty, drinking in

A pure organic pleasure from the lines Of curling mist, or from the level plain Of waters colour'd by the steady clouds.

The Sands of Westmoreland, the Creeks and Bays Of Cumbria's rocky limits, they can tell How when the Sea threw off his evening shade And to the Shepherd's huts beneath the crags Did send sweet notice of the rising moon, How I have stood, to fancies such as these, Engrafted in the tenderness of thought, A stranger, linking with the spectacle No conscious memory of a kindred sight, And bringing with me no peculiar sense Of quietness or peace, yet I have stood, Even while mine eye has mov'd o'er three long leagues Of shining water, gathering, as it seem'd, Through every hair-breadth of that field of light, New pleasure, like a bee among the flowers.





Thus, often in those fits of vulgar joy Which, through all seasons, on a child's pursuits Are prompt attendants, 'mid that giddy bliss Which, like a tempest, works along the blood And is forgotten; even then I felt

Gleams like the flashing of a shield; the earth And common face of Nature spake to me Rememberable things; sometimes, 'tis true, By chance collisions and quaint accidents Like those ill-sorted unions, work suppos'd Of evil-minded fairies, yet not vain

Nor profitless, if haply they impress'd Collateral objects and appearances,

Albeit lifeless then, and doom'd to sleep Until maturer seasons call'd them forth To impregnate and to elevate the mind.

--And if the vulgar joy by its own weight Wearied itself out of the memory,

The scenes which were a witness of that joy Remained, in their substantial lineaments Depicted on the brain, and to the eye Were visible, a daily sight; and thus By the impressive discipline of fear, By pleasure and repeated happiness,

So frequently repeated, and by force

Of obscure feelings representative

Of joys that were forgotten, these same scenes, So beauteous and majestic in themselves, Though yet the day was distant, did at length Become habitually dear, and all

Their hues and forms were by invisible links Allied to the affections. I began My story early, feeling as I fear,

The weakness of a human love, for days Disown'd by memory, ere the birth of spring Planting my snowdrops among winter snows.

Nor will it seem to thee, my Friend! so prompt In sympathy, that I have lengthen'd out, With fond and feeble tongue, a tedious tale.

Meanwhile, my hope has been that I might fetch Invigorating thoughts from former years, Might fix the wavering balance of my wind, And haply meet reproaches, too, whose power May spur me on, in manhood now mature, To honorable toil. Yet should these hopes Be vain, and thus should neither I be taught To understand myself, nor thou to know With better knowledge how the heart was fram'd Of him thou lovest, need I dread from thee Harsh judgments, if I am so loth to quit





Those recollected hours that have the charm Of visionary things, and lovely forms And sweet sensations that throw back our life And almost make our Infancy itself

A visible scene, on which the sun is shining?

One end hereby at least hath been attain'd, My mind hath been revived, and if this mood Desert me not, I will forthwith bring down, Through later years, the story of my life.

The road lies plain before me; 'tis a theme Single and of determined bounds; and hence I chuse it rather at this time, than work Of ampler or more varied argument.

William Wordsworth






. Thus far, O Friend! have we, though leaving much Unvisited, endeavour'd to retrace

My life through its first years, and measured back The way I travell'd when I first began To love the woods and fields; the passion yet Was in its birth, sustain'd, as might befal, By nourishment that came unsought, for still, From week to week, from month to month, we liv'd A round of tumult: duly were our games Prolong'd in summer till the day-light fail'd; No chair remain'd before the doors, the bench And threshold steps were empty; fast asleep The Labourer, and the old Man who had sate, A later lingerer, yet the revelry

Continued, and the loud uproar: at last, When all the ground was dark, and the huge clouds Were edged with twinkling stars, to bed we went, With weary joints, and with a beating mind.

Ah! is there one who ever has been young, Nor needs a monitory voice to tame

The pride of virtue, and of intellect?

And is there one, the wisest and the best Of all mankind, who does not sometimes wish For things which cannot be, who would not give, If so he might, to duty and to truth

The eagerness of infantine desire?

A tranquillizing spirit presses now

On my corporeal frame: so wide appears The vacancy between me and those days, Which yet have such self-presence in my mind That, sometimes, when I think of them, I seem Two consciousnesses, conscious of myself And of some other Being. A grey Stone Of native rock, left midway in the Square Of our small market Village, was the home And centre of these joys, and when, return'd After long absence, thither I repair'd, I found that it was split, and gone to build A smart Assembly-room that perk'd and flar'd With wash and rough-cast elbowing the ground Which had been ours. But let the fiddle scream, And be ye happy! yet, my Friends! I know That more than one of you will think with me Of those soft starry nights, and that old Dame From whom the stone was nam'd who there had sate And watch'd her Table with its huckster's wares Assiduous, thro' the length of sixty years.

We ran a boisterous race; the year span round With giddy motion. But the time approach'd That brought with it a regular desire For calmer pleasures, when the beauteous forms





Of Nature were collaterally attach'd

To every scheme of holiday delight,

And every boyish sport, less grateful else, And languidly pursued. When summer came It was the pastime of our afternoons

To beat along the plain of Windermere With rival oars, and the selected bourne Was now an Island musical with birds

That sang for ever; now a Sister Isle Beneath the oaks' umbrageous covert, sown With lillies of the valley, like a field; And now a third small Island where remain'd An old stone Table, and a moulder'd Cave, A Hermit's history. In such a race,

So ended, disappointment could be none, Uneasiness, or pain, or jealousy:

We rested in the shade, all pleas'd alike, Conquer'd and Conqueror. Thus the pride of strength, And the vain-glory of superior skill

Were interfus'd with objects which subdu'd And temper'd them, and gradually produc'd A quiet independence of the heart.

And to my Friend, who knows me, I may add, Unapprehensive of reproof, that hence Ensu'd a diffidence and modesty,

And I was taught to feel, perhaps too much, The self-sufficing power of solitude.

No delicate viands sapp'd our bodily strength; More than we wish'd we knew the blessing then Of vigorous hunger, for our daily meals Were frugal, Sabine fare! and then, exclude A little weekly stipend, and we lived Through three divisions of the quarter'd year In pennyless poverty. But now, to School Return'd, from the half-yearly holidays, We came with purses more profusely fill'd, Allowance which abundantly suffic'd

To gratify the palate with repasts

More costly than the Dame of whom I spake, That ancient Woman, and her board supplied.

Hence inroads into distant Vales, and long Excursions far away among the hills,

Hence rustic dinners on the cool green ground, Or in the woods, or near a river side, Or by some shady fountain, while soft airs Among the leaves were stirring, and the sun Unfelt, shone sweetly round us in our joy.

Nor is my aim neglected, if I tell

How twice in the long length of those half-years We from our funds, perhaps, with bolder hand





Drew largely, anxious for one day, at least, To feel the motion of the galloping Steed; And with the good old Inn-keeper, in truth, On such occasion sometimes we employ'd Sly subterfuge; for the intended bound Of the day's journey was too distant far For any cautious man, a Structure famed Beyond its neighbourhood, the antique Walls Of that large Abbey which within the vale Of Nightshade, to St. Mary's honour built, Stands yet, a mouldering Pile, with fractured Arch, Belfry, and Images, and living Trees, A holy Scene! along the smooth green turf Our Horses grazed: to more than inland peace Left by the sea wind passing overhead (Though wind of roughest temper) trees and towers May in that Valley oftentimes be seen, Both silent and both motionless alike; Such is the shelter that is there, and such The safeguard for repose and quietness.

Our steeds remounted, and the summons given, With whip and spur we by the Chauntry flew In uncouth race, and left the cross-legg'd Knight, And the stone-Abbot, and that single Wren Which one day sang so sweetly in the Nave Of the old Church, that, though from recent showers The earth was comfortless, and, touch'd by faint Internal breezes, sobbings of the place, And respirations, from the roofless walls The shuddering ivy dripp'd large drops, yet still, So sweetly 'mid the gloom the invisible Bird Sang to itself, that there I could have made My dwelling-place, and liv'd for ever there To hear such music. Through the Walls we flew And down the valley, and a circuit made In wantonness of heart, through rough and smooth We scamper'd homeward. Oh! ye Rocks and Streams, And that still Spirit of the evening air!

Even in this joyous time I sometimes felt Your presence, when with slacken'd step we breath'd Along the sides of the steep hills, or when, Lighted by gleams of moonlight from the sea, We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand.

Upon the Eastern Shore of Windermere, Above the crescent of a pleasant Bay, There stood an Inn, no homely-featured Shed, Brother of the surrounding Cottages,

But 'twas a splendid place, the door beset





With Chaises, Grooms, and Liveries, and within Decanters, Glasses, and the blood-red Wine.

In ancient times, or ere the Hall was built On the large Island, had this Dwelling been More worthy of a Poet's love, a Hut,

Proud of its one bright fire, and sycamore shade.

But though the rhymes were gone which once inscribed The threshold, and large golden characters On the blue-frosted Signboard had usurp'd The place of the old Lion, in contempt And mockery of the rustic painter's hand, Yet to this hour the spot to me is dear With all its foolish pomp. The garden lay Upon a slope surmounted by the plain

Of a small Bowling-green; beneath us stood A grove; with gleams of water through the trees And over the tree-tops; nor did we want Refreshment, strawberries and mellow cream.

And there, through half an afternoon, we play'd On the smooth platform, and the shouts we sent Made all the mountains ring. But ere the fall Of night, when in our pinnace we return'd Over the dusky Lake, and to the beach Of some small Island steer'd our course with one, The Minstrel of our troop, and left him there, And row'd off gently, while he blew his flute Alone upon the rock; Oh! then the calm And dead still water lay upon my mind Even with a weight of pleasure, and the sky Never before so beautiful, sank down

Into my heart, and held me like a dream.

Thus daily were my sympathies enlarged, And thus the common range of visible things Grew dear to me: already I began

To love the sun, a Boy I lov'd the sun, Not as I since have lov'd him, as a pledge And surety of our earthly life, a light Which while we view we feel we are alive; But, for this cause, that I had seen him lay His beauty on the morning hills, had seen The western mountain touch his setting orb, In many a thoughtless hour, when, from excess Of happiness, my blood appear'd to flow With its own pleasure, and I breath'd with joy.

And from like feelings, humble though intense, To patriotic and domestic love

Analogous, the moon to me was dear;

For I would dream away my purposes,

Standing to look upon her while she hung Midway between the hills, as if she knew





No other region; but belong'd to thee, Yea, appertain'd by a peculiar right

To thee and thy grey huts, my darling Vale!

Those incidental charms which first attach'd My heart to rural objects, day by day Grew weaker, and I hasten on to tell

How Nature, intervenient till this time, And secondary, now at length was sought For her own sake. But who shall parcel out His intellect, by geometric rules,

Split, like a province, into round and square?

Who knows the individual hour in which His habits were first sown, even as a seed, Who that shall point, as with a wand, and say,

'This portion of the river of my mind Came from yon fountain?' Thou, my Friend! art one More deeply read in thy own thoughts; to thee Science appears but, what in truth she is, Not as our glory and our absolute boast, But as a succedaneum, and a prop

To our infirmity. Thou art no slave

Of that false secondary power, by which, In weakness, we create distinctions, then Deem that our puny boundaries are things Which we perceive, and not which we have made.

To thee, unblinded by these outward shows, The unity of all has been reveal'd

And thou wilt doubt with me, less aptly skill'd Than many are to class the cabinet

Of their sensations, and, in voluble phrase, Run through the history and birth of each, As of a single independent thing.

Hard task to analyse a soul, in which, Not only general habits and desires,

But each most obvious and particular thought, Not in a mystical and idle sense,

But in the words of reason deeply weigh'd, Hath no beginning. Bless'd the infant Babe, (For with my best conjectures I would trace The progress of our Being) blest the Babe, Nurs'd in his Mother's arms, the Babe who sleeps Upon his Mother's breast, who, when his soul Claims manifest kindred with an earthly soul, Doth gather passion from his Mother's eye!

Such feelings pass into his torpid life Like an awakening breeze, and hence his mind Even [in the first trial of its powers]

Is prompt and watchful, eager to combine In one appearance, all the elements

And parts of the same object, else detach'd





And loth to coalesce. Thus, day by day, Subjected to the discipline of love,

His organs and recipient faculties

Are quicken'd, are more vigorous, his mind spreads, Tenacious of the forms which it receives.

In one beloved presence, nay and more, In that most apprehensive habitude

And those sensations which have been deriv'd From this beloved Presence, there exists A virtue which irradiates and exalts

All objects through all intercourse of sense.

No outcast he, bewilder'd and depress'd; Along his infant veins are interfus'd The gravitation and the filial bond

Of nature, that connect him with the world.

Emphatically such a Being lives,

An inmate of this active universe;

From nature largely he receives; nor so Is satisfied, but largely gives again, For feeling has to him imparted strength, And powerful in all sentiments of grief, Of exultation, fear, and joy, his mind, Even as an agent of the one great mind, Creates, creator and receiver both,

Working but in alliance with the works Which it beholds.--Such, verily, is the first Poetic spirit of our human life;

By uniform control of after years

In most abated or suppress'd, in some, Through every change of growth or of decay, Pre-eminent till death. From early days, Beginning not long after that first time In which, a Babe, by intercourse of touch, I held mute dialogues with my Mother's heart I have endeavour'd to display the means Whereby this infant sensibility,

Great birthright of our Being, was in me Augmented and sustain'd. Yet is a path More difficult before me, and I fear

That in its broken windings we shall need The chamois' sinews, and the eagle's wing: For now a trouble came into my mind

From unknown causes. I was left alone, Seeking the visible world, nor knowing why.

The props of my affections were remov'd, And yet the building stood, as if sustain'd By its own spirit! All that I beheld

Was dear to me, and from this cause it came, That now to Nature's finer influxes

My mind lay open, to that more exact

And intimate communion which our hearts Maintain with the minuter properties





Of objects which already are belov'd, And of those only. Many are the joys

Of youth; but oh! what happiness to live When every hour brings palpable access Of knowledge, when all knowledge is delight, And sorrow is not there. The seasons came, And every season to my notice brought A store of transitory qualities

Which, but for this most watchful power of love Had been neglected, left a register

Of permanent relations, else unknown, Hence life, and change, and beauty, solitude More active, even, than 'best society', Society made sweet as solitude

By silent inobtrusive sympathies,

And gentle agitations of the mind

From manifold distinctions, difference Perceived in things, where to the common eye, No difference is; and hence, from the same source Sublimer joy; for I would walk alone, In storm and tempest, or in starlight nights Beneath the quiet Heavens; and, at that time, Have felt whate'er there is of power in sound To breathe an elevated mood, by form

Or image unprofaned; and I would stand, Beneath some rock, listening to sounds that are The ghostly language of the ancient earth, Or make their dim abode in distant winds.

Thence did I drink the visionary power.

I deem not profitless those fleeting moods Of shadowy exultation: not for this,

That they are kindred to our purer mind And intellectual life; but that the soul, Remembering how she felt, but what she felt Remembering not, retains an obscure sense Of possible sublimity, to which,

With growing faculties she doth aspire, With faculties still growing, feeling still That whatsoever point they gain, they still Have something to pursue. And not alone, In grandeur and in tumult, but no less In tranquil scenes, that universal power And fitness in the latent qualities

And essences of things, by which the mind Is mov'd by feelings of delight, to me Came strengthen'd with a superadded soul, A virtue not its own. My morning walks Were early; oft, before the hours of School I travell'd round our little Lake, five miles Of pleasant wandering, happy time! more dear For this, that one was by my side, a Friend Then passionately lov'd; with heart how full





Will he peruse these lines, this page, perhaps A blank to other men! for many years

Have since flow'd in between us; and our minds, Both silent to each other, at this time We live as if those hours had never been.

Nor seldom did I lift our cottage latch Far earlier, and before the vernal thrush Was audible, among the hills I sate

Alone, upon some jutting eminence

At the first hour of morning, when the Vale Lay quiet in an utter solitude.

How shall I trace the history, where seek The origin of what I then have felt?

Oft in these moments such a holy calm Did overspread my soul, that I forgot That I had bodily eyes, and what I saw Appear'd like something in myself, a dream, A prospect in my mind. 'Twere long to tell What spring and autumn, what the winter snows, And what the summer shade, what day and night, The evening and the morning, what my dreams And what my waking thoughts supplied, to nurse That spirit of religious love in which I walked with Nature. But let this, at least Be not forgotten, that I still retain'd My first creative sensibility,

That by the regular action of the world My soul was unsubdu'd. A plastic power Abode with me, a forming hand, at times Rebellious, acting in a devious mood, A local spirit of its own, at war

With general tendency, but for the most Subservient strictly to the external things With which it commun'd. An auxiliar light Came from my mind which on the setting sun Bestow'd new splendor, the melodious birds, The gentle breezes, fountains that ran on, Murmuring so sweetly in themselves, obey'd A like dominion; and the midnight storm Grew darker in the presence of my eye.

Hence by obeisance, my devotion hence, And hence my transport. Nor should this, perchance, Pass unrecorded, that I still have lov'd The exercise and produce of a toil

Than analytic industry to me

More pleasing, and whose character I deem Is more poetic as resembling more

Creative agency. I mean to speak

Of that interminable building rear'd

By observation of affinities

In objects where no brotherhood exists To common minds. My seventeenth year was come





And, whether from this habit, rooted now So deeply in my mind, or from excess

Of the great social principle of life, Coercing all things into sympathy,

To unorganic natures I transferr'd

My own enjoyments, or, the power of truth Coming in revelation, I convers'd

With things that really are, I, at this time Saw blessings spread around me like a sea.

Thus did my days pass on, and now at length From Nature and her overflowing soul

I had receiv'd so much that all my thoughts Were steep'd in feeling; I was only then Contented when with bliss ineffable

I felt the sentiment of Being spread

O'er all that moves, and all that seemeth still, O'er all, that, lost beyond the reach of thought And human knowledge, to the human eye Invisible, yet liveth to the heart,

O'er all that leaps, and runs, and shouts, and sings, Or beats the gladsome air, o'er all that glides Beneath the wave, yea, in the wave itself And mighty depth of waters. Wonder not If such my transports were; for in all things I saw one life, and felt that it was joy.

One song they sang, and it was audible, Most audible then when the fleshly ear, O'ercome by grosser prelude of that strain, Forgot its functions, and slept undisturb'd.

If this be error, and another faith

Find easier access to the pious mind, Yet were I grossly destitute of all

Those human sentiments which make this earth So dear, if I should fail, with grateful voice To speak of you, Ye Mountains and Ye Lakes, And sounding Cataracts! Ye Mists and Winds That dwell among the hills where I was born.

If, in my youth, I have been pure in heart, If, mingling with the world, I am content With my own modest pleasures, and have liv'd, With God and Nature communing, remov'd From little enmities and low desires, The gift is yours; if in these times of fear, This melancholy waste of hopes o'erthrown, If, 'mid indifference and apathy

And wicked exultation, when good men, On every side fall off we know not how, To selfishness, disguis'd in gentle names Of peace, and quiet, and domestic love, Yet mingled, not unwillingly, with sneers





On visionary minds; if in this time

Of dereliction and dismay, I yet

Despair not of our nature; but retain A more than Roman confidence, a faith That fails not, in all sorrow my support, The blessing of my life, the gift is yours, Ye mountains! thine, O Nature! Thou hast fed My lofty speculations; and in thee,

For this uneasy heart of ours I find

A never-failing principle of joy,

And purest passion. Thou, my Friend! wert rear'd In the great City, 'mid far other scenes; But we, by different roads at length have gain'd The self-same bourne. And for this cause to Thee I speak, unapprehensive of contempt,

The insinuated scoff of coward tongues, And all that silent language which so oft In conversation betwixt man and man

Blots from the human countenance all trace Of beauty and of love. For Thou hast sought The truth in solitude, and Thou art one, The most intense of Nature's worshippers In many things my Brother, chiefly here In this my deep devotion. Fare Thee well!

Health, and the quiet of a healthful mind Attend thee! seeking oft the haunts of men, And yet more often living with Thyself, And for Thyself, so haply shall thy days Be many, and a blessing to mankind.

William Wordsworth





The Prelude. (book V )

WHEN Contemplation, like the night-calm felt Through earth and sky, spreads widely, and sends deep Into the soul its tranquillising power, Even then I sometimes grieve for thee, O Man, Earth's paramount Creature! not so much for woes That thou endurest; heavy though that weight be, Cloud-like it mounts, or touched with light divine Doth melt away; but for those palms achieved Through length of time, by patient exercise Of study and hard thought; there, there, it is That sadness finds its fuel. Hitherto, In progress through this Verse, my mind hath looked Upon the speaking face of earth and heaven As her prime teacher, intercourse with man Established by the sovereign Intellect, Who through that bodily image hath diffused, As might appear to the eye of fleeting time, A deathless spirit. Thou also, man! hast wrought, For commerce of thy nature with herself, Things that aspire to unconquerable life; And yet we feel--we cannot choose but feel--

That they must perish. Tremblings of the heart It gives, to think that our immortal being No more shall need such garments; and yet man, As long as he shall be the child of earth, Might almost "weep to have" what he may lose, Nor be himself extinguished, but survive, Abject, depressed, forlorn, disconsolate.

A thought is with me sometimes, and I say,--

Should the whole frame of earth by inward throes Be wrenched, or fire come down from far to scorch Her pleasant habitations, and dry up

Old Ocean, in his bed left singed and bare, Yet would the living Presence still subsist Victorious, and composure would ensue, And kindlings like the morning--presage sure Of day returning and of life revived.

But all the meditations of mankind,

Yea, all the adamantine holds of truth By reason built, or passion, which itself Is highest reason in a soul sublime;

The consecrated works of Bard and Sage, Sensuous or intellectual, wrought by men, Twin labourers and heirs of the same hopes; Where would they be? Oh! why hath not the Mind Some element to stamp her image on

In nature somewhat nearer to her own?

Why, gifted with such powers to send abroad Her spirit, must it lodge in shrines so frail?

One day, when from my lips a like complaint Had fallen in presence of a studious friend,





He with a smile made answer, that in truth

'Twas going far to seek disquietude;

But on the front of his reproof confessed That he himself had oftentimes given way To kindred hauntings. Whereupon I told, That once in the stillness of a summer's noon, While I was seated in a rocky cave

By the sea-side, perusing, so it chanced, The famous history of the errant knight Recorded by Cervantes, these same thoughts Beset me, and to height unusual rose, While listlessly I sate, and, having closed The book, had turned my eyes toward the wide sea.

On poetry and geometric truth,

And their high privilege of lasting life, From all internal injury exempt,

I mused; upon these chiefly: and at length, My senses yielding to the sultry air, Sleep seized me, and I passed into a dream.

I saw before me stretched a boundless plain Of sandy wilderness, all black and void, And as I looked around, distress and fear Came creeping over me, when at my side, Close at my side, an uncouth shape appeared Upon a dromedary, mounted high.

He seemed an Arab of the Bedouin tribes: A lance he bore, and underneath one arm A stone, and in the opposite hand a shell Of a surpassing brightness. At the sight Much I rejoiced, not doubting but a guide Was present, one who with unerring skill Would through the desert lead me; and while yet I looked and looked, self-questioned what this freight Which the new-comer carried through the waste Could mean, the Arab told me that the stone (To give it in the language of the dream) Was "Euclid's Elements," and "This," said he,

"Is something of more worth;" and at the word Stretched forth the shell, so beautiful in shape, In colour so resplendent, with command That I should hold it to my ear. I did so, And heard that instant in an unknown tongue, Which yet I understood, articulate sounds, A loud prophetic blast of harmony;


Had given forewarning, and that he himself Was going then to bury those two books: The one that held acquaintance with the stars,





And wedded soul to soul in purest bond Of reason, undisturbed by space or time; The other that was a god, yea many gods, Had voices more than all the winds, with power To exhilarate the spirit, and to soothe, Through every clime, the heart of human kind.

While this was uttering, strange as it may seem, I wondered not, although I plainly saw The one to be a stone, the other a shell; Nor doubted once but that they both were books, Having a perfect faith in all that passed.

Far stronger, now, grew the desire I felt To cleave unto this man; but when I prayed To share his enterprise, he hurried on Reckless of me: I followed, not unseen, For oftentimes he cast a backward look, Grasping his twofold treasure.--Lance in rest, He rode, I keeping pace with him; and now He, to my fancy, had become the knight Whose tale Cervantes tells; yet not the knight, But was an Arab of the desert too;

Of these was neither, and was both at once.

His countenance, meanwhile, grew more disturbed; And, looking backwards when he looked, mine eyes Saw, over half the wilderness diffused, A bed of glittering light: I asked the cause:

"It is," said he, "the waters of the deep Gathering upon us;" quickening then the pace Of the unwieldy creature he bestrode, He left me: I called after him aloud; He heeded not; but, with his twofold charge Still in his grasp, before me, full in view, Went hurrying o'er the illimitable waste, With the fleet waters of a drowning world In chase of him; whereat I waked in terror, And saw the sea before me, and the book, In which I had been reading, at my side.

Full often, taking from the world of sleep This Arab phantom, which I thus beheld, This semi-Quixote, I to him have given A substance, fancied him a living man, A gentle dweller in the desert, crazed By love and feeling, and internal thought Protracted among endless solitudes;

Have shaped him wandering upon this quest!

Nor have I pitied him; but rather felt Reverence was due to a being thus employed; And thought that, in the blind and awful lair Of such a madness, reason did lie couched.

Enow there are on earth to take in charge Their wives, their children, and their virgin loves,





Or whatsoever else the heart holds dear; Enow to stir for these; yea, will I say, Contemplating in soberness the approach Of an event so dire, by signs in earth Or heaven made manifest, that I could share That maniac's fond anxiety, and go

Upon like errand. Oftentimes at least Me hath such strong entrancement overcome, When I have held a volume in my hand, Poor earthly casket of immortal verse, Shakespeare, or Milton, labourers divine!

Great and benign, indeed, must be the power Of living nature, which could thus so long Detain me from the best of other guides And dearest helpers, left unthanked, unpraised, Even in the time of lisping infancy;

And later down, in prattling childhood even, While I was travelling back among those days, How could I ever play an ingrate's part?

Once more should I have made those bowers resound, By intermingling strains of thankfulness With their own thoughtless melodies; at least It might have well beseemed me to repeat Some simply fashioned tale, to tell again, In slender accents of sweet verse, some tale That did bewitch me then, and soothes me now.

O Friend! O Poet! brother of my soul, Think not that I could pass along untouched By these remembrances. Yet wherefore speak?

Why call upon a few weak words to say What is already written in the hearts Of all that breathe?--what in the path of all Drops daily from the tongue of every child, Wherever man is found? The trickling tear Upon the cheek of listening Infancy

Proclaims it, and the insuperable look That drinks as if it never could be full.

That portion of my story I shall leave There registered: whatever else of power Or pleasure sown, or fostered thus, may be Peculiar to myself, let that remain


That in the name of all inspired souls--

From Homer the great Thunderer, from the voice That roars along the bed of Jewish song, And that more varied and elaborate,





Those trumpet-tones of harmony that shake Our shores in England,--from those loftiest notes Down to the low and wren-like warblings, made For cottagers and spinners at the wheel, And sun-burnt travellers resting their tired limbs, Stretched under wayside hedge-rows, ballad tunes, Food for the hungry ears of little ones, And of old men who have survived their joys--

'Tis just that in behalf of these, the works, And of the men that framed them, whether known Or sleeping nameless in their scattered graves, That I should here assert their rights, attest Their honours, and should, once for all, pronounce Their benediction; speak of them as Powers For ever to be hallowed; only less,

For what we are and what we may become, Than Nature's self, which is the breath of God, Or His pure Word by miracle revealed.

Rarely and with reluctance would I stoop To transitory themes; yet I rejoice,

And, by these thoughts admonished, will pour out Thanks with uplifted heart, that I was reared Safe from an evil which these days have laid Upon the children of the land, a pest That might have dried me up, body and soul.

This verse is dedicate to Nature's self, And things that teach as Nature teaches: then, Oh! where had been the Man, the Poet where, Where had we been, we two, beloved Friend!

If in the season of unperilous choice, In lieu of wandering, as we did, through vales Rich with indigenous produce, open ground Of Fancy, happy pastures ranged at will, We had been followed, hourly watched, and noosed, Each in his several melancholy walk

Stringed like a poor man's heifer at its feed, Led through the lanes in forlorn servitude; Or rather like a stalled ox debarred

From touch of growing grass, that may not taste A flower till it have yielded up its sweets A prelibation to the mower's scythe.

Behold the parent hen amid her brood, Though fledged and feathered, and well pleased to part And straggle from her presence, still a brood, And she herself from the maternal bond Still undischarged; yet doth she little more Than move with them in tenderness and love, A centre to the circle which they make; And now and then, alike from need of theirs And call of her own natural appetites,





She scratches, ransacks up the earth for food, Which they partake at pleasure. Early died My honoured Mother, she who was the heart And hinge of all our learnings and our loves: She left us destitute, and, as we might, Trooping together. Little suits it me To break upon the sabbath of her rest With any thought that looks at others' blame; Nor would I praise her but in perfect love.

Hence am I checked: but let me boldly say, In gratitude, and for the sake of truth, Unheard by her, that she, not falsely taught, Fetching her goodness rather from times past, Than shaping novelties for times to come, Had no presumption, no such jealousy, Nor did by habit of her thoughts mistrust Our nature, but had virtual faith that He Who fills the mother's breast with innocent milk, Doth also for our nobler part provide, Under His great correction and control, As innocent instincts, and as innocent food; Or draws, for minds that are left free to trust In the simplicities of opening life,

Sweet honey out of spurned or dreaded weeds.

This was her creed, and therefore she was pure From anxious fear of error or mishap, And evil, overweeningly so called;

Was not puffed up by false unnatural hopes, Nor selfish with unnecessary cares,

Nor with impatience from the season asked More than its timely produce; rather loved The hours for what they are, than from regard Glanced on their promises in restless pride.

Such was she--not from faculties more strong Than others have, but from the times, perhaps, And spot in which she lived, and through a grace Of modest meekness, simple-mindedness, A heart that found benignity and hope, Being itself benign.

My drift I fear

Is scarcely obvious; but, that common sense May try this modern system by its fruits, Leave let me take to place before her sight A specimen pourtrayed with faithful hand.

Full early trained to worship seemliness, This model of a child is never known


Its dignity; with gifts he bubbles o'er As generous as a fountain; selfishness May not come near him, nor the little throng Of flitting pleasures tempt him from his path; The wandering beggars propagate his name,





Dumb creatures find him tender as a nun, And natural or supernatural fear,

Unless it leap upon him in a dream,

Touches him not. To enhance the wonder, see How arch his notices, how nice his sense Of the ridiculous; not blind is he

To the broad follies of the licensed world, Yet innocent himself withal, though shrewd, And can read lectures upon innocence; A miracle of scientific lore,

Ships he can guide across the pathless sea, And tell you all their cunning; he can read The inside of the earth, and spell the stars; He knows the policies of foreign lands; Can string you names of districts, cities, towns, The whole world over, tight as beads of dew Upon a gossamer thread; he sifts, he weighs; All things are put to question; he must live Knowing that he grows wiser every day Or else not live at all, and seeing too Each little drop of wisdom as it falls Into the dimpling cistern of his heart: For this unnatural growth the trainer blame, Pity the tree.--Poor human vanity,

Wert thou extinguished, little would be left Which he could truly love; but how escape?

For, ever as a thought of purer birth Rises to lead him toward a better clime, Some intermeddler still is on the watch To drive him back, and pound him, like a stray, Within the pinfold of his own conceit.

Meanwhile old grandame earth is grieved to find The playthings, which her love designed for him, Unthought of: in their woodland beds the flowers Weep, and the river sides are all forlorn.

Oh! give us once again the wishing-cap Of Fortunatus, and the invisible coat Of Jack the Giant-killer, Robin Hood, And Sabra in the forest with St. George!

The child, whose love is here, at least, doth reap One precious gain, that he forgets himself.

These mighty workmen of our later age, Who, with a broad highway, have overbridged The froward chaos of futurity,

Tamed to their bidding; they who have the skill To manage books, and things, and make them act On infant minds as surely as the sun

Deals with a flower; the keepers of our time, The guides and wardens of our faculties, Sages who in their prescience would control All accidents, and to the very road





Which they have fashioned would confine us down, Like engines; when will their presumption learn, That in the unreasoning progress of the world A wiser spirit is at work for us,

A better eye than theirs, most prodigal Of blessings, and most studious of our good, Even in what seem our most unfruitful hours?

There was a Boy: ye knew him well, ye cliffs And islands of Winander!--many a time At evening, when the earliest stars began To move along the edges of the hills, Rising or setting, would he stand alone Beneath the trees or by the glimmering lake, And there, with fingers interwoven, both hands Pressed closely palm to palm, and to his mouth Uplifted, he, as through an instrument, Blew mimic hootings to the silent owls, That they might answer him; and they would shout Across the watery vale, and shout again, Responsive to his call, with quivering peals, And long halloos and screams, and echoes loud, Redoubled and redoubled, concourse wild Of jocund din; and, when a lengthened pause Of silence came and baffled his best skill, Then sometimes, in that silence while he hung Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise Has carried far into his heart the voice Of mountain torrents; or the visible scene Would enter unawares into his mind,

With all its solemn imagery, its rocks, Its woods, and that uncertain heaven, received Into the bosom of the steady lake.

This Boy was taken from his mates, and died In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old.

Fair is the spot, most beautiful the vale Where he was born; the grassy churchyard hangs Upon a slope above the village school, And through that churchyard when my way has led On summer evenings, I believe that there A long half hour together I have stood Mute, looking at the grave in which he lies!


On her green hill, forgetful of this Boy Who slumbers at her feet,--forgetful, too, Of all her silent neighbourhood of graves, And listening only to the gladsome sounds That, from the rural school ascending, play





Beneath her and about her. May she long Behold a race of young ones like to those With whom I herded!--(easily, indeed, We might have fed upon a fatter soil

Of arts and letters--but be that forgiven)--

A race of real children; not too wise, Too learned, or too good; but wanton, fresh, And bandied up and down by love and hate; Not unresentful where self-justified; Fierce, moody, patient, venturous, modest, shy; Mad at their sports like withered leaves in winds; Though doing wrong and suffering, and full oft Bending beneath our life's mysterious weight Of pain, and doubt, and fear, yet yielding not In happiness to the happiest upon earth.

Simplicity in habit, truth in speech, Be these the daily strengtheners of their minds; May books and Nature be their early joy!

And knowledge, rightly honoured with that name--

Knowledge not purchased by the loss of power!

Well do I call to mind the very week

When I was first intrusted to the care Of that sweet Valley; when its paths, its shores, And brooks were like a dream of novelty To my half-infant thoughts; that very week, While I was roving up and down alone, Seeking I knew not what, I chanced to cross One of those open fields, which, shaped like ears, Make green peninsulas on Esthwaite's Lake: Twilight was coming on, yet through the gloom Appeared distinctly on the opposite shore A heap of garments, as if left by one Who might have there been bathing. Long I watched, But no one owned them; meanwhile the calm lake Grew dark with all the shadows on its breast, And, now and then, a fish up-leaping snapped The breathless stillness. The succeeding day, Those unclaimed garments telling a plain tale Drew to the spot an anxious crowd; some looked In passive expectation from the shore, While from a boat others hung o'er the deep, Sounding with grappling irons and long poles.

At last, the dead man, 'mid that beauteous scene Of trees and hills and water, bolt upright Rose, with his ghastly face, a spectre shape Of terror; yet no soul-debasing fear, Young as I was, a child not nine years old, Possessed me, for my inner eye had seen Such sights before, among the shining streams Of faery land, the forest of romance.

Their spirit hallowed the sad spectacle





With decoration of ideal grace;

A dignity, a smoothness, like the works Of Grecian art, and purest poesy.

A precious treasure had I long possessed, A little yellow, canvas-covered book, A slender abstract of the Arabian tales; And, from companions in a new abode,

When first I learnt, that this dear prize of mine Was but a block hewn from a mighty quarry--

That there were four large volumes, laden all With kindred matter, 'twas to me, in truth, A promise scarcely earthly. Instantly, With one not richer than myself, I made A covenant that each should lay aside The moneys he possessed, and hoard up more, Till our joint savings had amassed enough To make this book our own. Through several months, In spite of all temptation, we preserved Religiously that vow; but firmness failed, Nor were we ever masters of our wish.

And when thereafter to my father's house The holidays returned me, there to find That golden store of books which I had left, What joy was mine! How often in the course Of those glad respites, though a soft west wind Ruffled the waters to the angler's wish, For a whole day together, have I lain Down by thy side, O Derwent! murmuring stream, On the hot stones, and in the glaring sun, And there have read, devouring as I read, Defrauding the day's glory, desperate!

Till with a sudden bound of smart reproach, Such as an idler deals with in his shame, I to the sport betook myself again.

A gracious spirit o'er this earth presides, And o'er the heart of man; invisibly

It comes, to works of unreproved delight, And tendency benign, directing those

Who care not, know not, think not, what they do.

The tales that charm away the wakeful night In Araby, romances; legends penned


By the dismantled warrior in old age, Out of the bowels of those very schemes In which his youth did first extravagate; These spread like day, and something in the shape Of these will live till man shall be no more.





Dumb yearnings, hidden appetites, are ours, And 'they must' have their food. Our childhood sits, Our simple childhood, sits upon a throne That hath more power than all the elements.

I guess not what this tells of Being past, Nor what it augurs of the life to come; But so it is; and, in that dubious hour--

That twilight--when we first begin to see This dawning earth, to recognise, expect, And, in the long probation that ensues, The time of trial, ere we learn to live In reconcilement with our stinted powers; To endure this state of meagre vassalage, Unwilling to forego, confess, submit, Uneasy and unsettled, yoke-fellows

To custom, mettlesome, and not yet tamed And humbled down--oh! then we feel, we feel, We know where we have friends. Ye dreamers, then, Forgers of daring tales! we bless you then, Impostors, drivellers, dotards, as the ape Philosophy will call you: 'then' we feel With what, and how great might ye are in league, Who make our wish, our power, our thought a deed, An empire, a possession,--ye whom time And seasons serve; all Faculties to whom Earth crouches, the elements are potter's clay, Space like a heaven filled up with northern lights, Here, nowhere, there, and everywhere at once.

Relinquishing this lofty eminence

For ground, though humbler, not the less a tract Of the same isthmus, which our spirits cross In progress from their native continent To earth and human life, the Song might dwell On that delightful time of growing youth, When craving for the marvellous gives way To strengthening love for things that we have seen; When sober truth and steady sympathies, Offered to notice by less daring pens, Take firmer hold of us, and words themselves Move us with conscious pleasure.

I am sad

At thought of rapture now for ever flown; Almost to tears I sometimes could be sad To think of, to read over, many a page, Poems withal of name, which at that time Did never fail to entrance me, and are now Dead in my eyes, dead as a theatre

Fresh emptied of spectators. Twice five years Or less I might have seen, when first my mind With conscious pleasure opened to the charm Of words in tuneful order, found them sweet





For their own 'sakes', a passion, and a power; And phrases pleased me chosen for delight, For pomp, or love. Oft, in the public roads Yet unfrequented, while the morning light Was yellowing the hill tops, I went abroad With a dear friend, and for the better part Of two delightful hours we strolled along By the still borders of the misty lake, Repeating favourite verses with one voice, Or conning more, as happy as the birds That round us chaunted. Well might we be glad, Lifted above the ground by airy fancies, More bright than madness or the dreams of wine; And, though full oft the objects of our love Were false, and in their splendour overwrought, Yet was there surely then no vulgar power Working within us,--nothing less, in truth, Than that most noble attribute of man, Though yet untutored and inordinate,

That wish for something loftier, more adorned, Than is the common aspect, daily garb, Of human life. What wonder, then, if sounds Of exultation echoed through the groves!

For, images, and sentiments, and words, And everything encountered or pursued In that delicious world of poesy,

Kept holiday, a never-ending show,

With music, incense, festival, and flowers!

Here must we pause: this only let me add, From heart-experience, and in humblest sense Of modesty, that he, who in his youth A daily wanderer among woods and fields With living Nature hath been intimate, Not only in that raw unpractised time Is stirred to ecstasy, as others are, By glittering verse; but further, doth receive, In measure only dealt out to himself, Knowledge and increase of enduring joy From the great Nature that exists in works Of mighty Poets. Visionary power

Attends the motions of the viewless winds, Embodied in the mystery of words:


Even forms and substances are circumfused By that transparent veil with light divine, And, through the turnings intricate of verse, Present themselves as objects recognised, In flashes, and with glory not their own.





William Wordsworth





The Primrose of the Rock

A Rock there is whose homely front

The passing traveller slights;

Yet there the glow-worms hang their lamps, Like stars, at various heights;

And one coy Primrose to that Rock

The vernal breeze invites.

What hideous warfare hath been waged, What kingdoms overthrown,

Since first I spied that Primrose-tuft And marked it for my own;

A lasting link in Nature's chain

From highest heaven let down!

The flowers, still faithful to the stems, Their fellowship renew;

The stems are faithful to the root,

That worketh out of view;

And to the rock the root adheres

In every fibre true.

Close clings to earth the living rock, Though threatening still to fall:

The earth is constant to her sphere;

And God upholds them all:

So blooms this lonely Plant, nor dreads Her annual funeral.

Here closed the meditative strain;

But air breathed soft that day,

The hoary mountain-heights were cheered, The sunny vale looked gay;

And to the Primrose of the Rock

I gave this after-lay.

I sang-Let myriads of bright flowers, Like Thee, in field and grove

Revive unenvied;-mightier far,

Than tremblings that reprove

Our vernal tendencies to hope,

Is God's redeeming love;

That love which changed-for wan disease, For sorrow that had bent

O'er hopeless dust, for withered age-

Their moral element,

And turned the thistles of a curse

To types beneficent.

Sin-blighted though we are, we too,

The reasoning Sons of Men,

From one oblivious winter called

Shall rise, and breathe again;





And in eternal summer lose

Our threescore years and ten.

To humbleness of heart descends

This prescience from on high,

The faith that elevates the just,

Before and when they die;

And makes each soul a separate heaven A court for Deity.

William Wordsworth





The Rainbow

My heart leaps up when I behold

A Rainbow in the sky:

So was it when my life began;

So is it now I am a man;

So be it when I shall grow old,

Or let me die!

The Child is father of the man;

And I wish my days to be

Bound each to each by natural piety.

William Wordsworth





The Reaper

Behold her, single in the field,

Yon solitary Highland Lass!

Reaping and singing by herself;

Stop here, or gently pass!

Alone she cuts and binds the grain,

And sings a melancholy strain;

O listen! for the vale profound

Is overflowing with the sound.

No nightingale did ever chaunt

More welcome notes to weary bands

Of travellers in some shady haunt,

Among Arabian sands:

A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard

In spring-time from the cuckoo-bird

Breaking the silence of the seas

Among the farthest Hebrides.

Will no one tell me what she sings?

Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow

For old, unhappy, far-off things,

And battles long ago:

Or is it some more humble lay,

Familiar matter of today?

Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,

That has been, and may be again!

Whate'er the theme, the maiden sang

As if her song could have no ending;

I saw her singing at her work,

And o'er the sickle bending;

I listened, motionless and still;

And as I mounted up the hill

The music in my heart I bore,

Long after it was heard no more.

William Wordsworth





The Reverie of Poor Susan

At the corner of Wood Street, when daylight appears, Hangs a Thrush that sings loud, it has sung for three years: Poor Susan has passed by the spot, and has heard In the silence of morning the song of the Bird.

'Tis a note of enchantment; what ails her? She sees A mountain ascending, a vision of trees; Bright volumes of vapour through Lothbury glide, And a river flows on through the vale of Cheapside.

Green pastures she views in the midst of the dale, Down which she so often has tripped with her pail; And a single small cottage, a nest like a dove's, The one only dwelling on earth that she loves.

She looks, and her heart is in heaven: but they fade, The mist and the river, the hill and the shade: The stream will not flow, and the hill will not rise, And the colours have all passed away from her eyes!

William Wordsworth





The Russian Fugitive

I

ENOUGH of rose-bud lips, and eyes

Like harebells bathed in dew,

Of cheek that with carnation vies,

And veins of violet hue;

Earth wants not beauty that may scorn A likening to frail flowers;

Yea, to the stars, if they were born

For seasons and for hours.

Through Moscow's gates, with gold unbarred, Stepped One at dead of night,

Whom such high beauty could not guard From meditated blight;

By stealth she passed, and fled as fast As doth the hunted fawn,

Nor stopped, till in the dappling east Appeared unwelcome dawn.

Seven days she lurked in brake and field, Seven nights her course renewed,

Sustained by what her scrip might yield, Or berries of the wood;

At length, in darkness travelling on, When lowly doors were shut,

The haven of her hope she won,

Her foster-mother's hut.

'To put your love to dangerous proof

I come,' said she, 'from far;

For I have left my Father's roof,

In terror of the czar.'

No answer did the Matron give,

No second look she cast,

But hung upon the fugitive,

Embracing and embraced.

She led the Lady to a seat

Beside the glimmering fire,

Bathed duteously her wayworn feet,

Prevented each desire:---

The cricket chirped, the house-dog dozed, And on that simple bed,

Where she in childhood had reposed,

Now rests her weary head.

When she, whose couch had been the sod, Whose curtain, pine or thorn,

Had breathed a sigh of thanks to God, Who comforts the forlorn;

While over her the Matron bent





Sleep sealed her eyes, and stole

Feeling from limbs with travel spent, And trouble from the soul.

Refreshed, the Wanderer rose at morn, And soon again was dight

In those unworthy vestments worn

Through long and perilous flight;

And 'O beloved Nurse,' she said,

'My thanks with silent tears

Have unto Heaven and You been paid:

Now listen to my fears !

'Have you forgot'---and here she smiled---

'The babbling flatteries

You lavished on me when a child

Disporting round your knees?

I was your lambkin, and your bird,

Your star, your gem, your flower;

Light words, that were more lightly heard In many a cloudless hour!

'The blossom you so fondly praised

Is come to bitter fruit;

A mighty One upon me gazed;

I spurned his lawless suit,

And must be hidden from his wrath:

You, Foster-father dear,

Will guide me in my forward path;

I may not tarry here!

'I cannot bring to utter woe

Your proved fidelity.'---

'Dear Child, sweet Mistress, say not so!

For you we both would die.'

'Nay, nay, I come with semblance feigned And cheek embrowned by art;

Yet, being inwardly unstained,

With courage will depart.'

'But whither would you, could you, flee?

A poor Man's counsel take;

The Holy Virgin gives to me

A thought for your dear sake;

Rest, shielded by our Lady's grace,

And soon shall you be led

Forth to a safe abiding-place,

Where never foot doth tread.'

II

THE dwelling of this faithful pair

In a straggling village stood,





For One who breathed unquiet air

A dangerous neighbourhood;

But wide around lay forest ground

With thickets rough and blind;

And pine-trees made a heavy shade

Impervious to the wind.

And there, sequestered from the eight, Was spread a treacherous swamp,

On which the noonday sun shed light

As from a lonely lamp;

And midway in the unsafe morass,

A single Island rose

Of firm dry ground, with healthful grass Adorned, and shady boughs.

The Woodman knew, for such the craft

This Russian vassal plied,

That never fowler's gun, nor shaft

Of archer, there was tried;

A sanctuary seemed the spot

From all intrusion free;

And there he planned an artful Cot

For perfect secrecy.

With earnest pains unchecked by dread Of Power's far-stretching hand,

The bold good Man his labor sped

At nature's pure command;

Heart-soothed, and busy as a wren,

While, in a hollow nook,

She moulds her sight-eluding den

Above a murmuring brook.

His task accomplished to his mind,

The twain ere break of day

Creep forth, and through the forest wind Their solitary way;

Few words they speak, nor dare to slack Their pace from mile to mile,

Till they have crossed the quaking marsh, And reached the lonely Isle.

The sun above the pine-trees showed

A bright and cheerful face;

And Ina looked for her abode,

The promised hiding-place;

She sought in vain, the Woodman smiled; No threshold could be seen,

Nor roof, nor window;Ñall seemed wild As it had ever been.





Advancing, you might guess an hour,

The front with such nice care

Is masked, 'if house it be or bower,'

But in they entered are;

As shaggy as were wall and roof

With branches intertwined,

So smooth was all within, air-proof,

And delicately lined:

And hearth was there, and maple dish, And cups in seemly rows,

And couch---all ready to a wish

For nurture or repose;

And Heaven doth to her virtue grant

That here she may abide

In solitude, with every want

By cautious love supplied.

No queen, before a shouting crowd,

Led on in bridal state,

E'er struggled with a heart so proud, Entering her palace gate:

Rejoiced to bid the world farewell,

No saintly anchoress

E'er took possession of her cell

With deeper thankfulness.

'Father of all, upon thy care

And mercy am I thrown;

Be thou my safeguard!'---such her prayer When she was left alone,

Kneeling amid the wilderness

When joy had passed away,

And smiles, fond efforts of distress

To hide what they betray!

The prayer is heard, the Saints have seen, Diffused through form and face,

Resolves devotedly serene;

That monumental grace

Of Faith, which doth all passions tame That Reason should control;

And shows in the untrembling frame

A statue of the soul.

III

'TIS sung in ancient minstrelsy

That Phoebus wont to wear

The leaves of any pleasant tree

Around his golden hair;

Till Daphne, desperate with pursuit

Of his imperious love,





At her own prayer transformed, took root, A laurel in the grove.

Then did the Penitent adorn

His brow with laurel green;

And 'mid his bright locks never shorn No meaner leaf was seen;

And poets sage, through every age,

About their temples wound

The bay; and conquerors thanked the Gods, With laurel chaplets crowned,

Into the mists of fabling Time

So far runs back the praise

Of Beauty, that disdains to climb

Along forbidden ways;

That scorns temptation; power defies

Where mutual love is not;

And to the tomb for rescue flies

When life would be a blot.

To this fair Votaress, a fate

More mild doth Heaven ordain

Upon her Island desolate;

And word, not breathed in vain,

Might tell what intercourse she found, Her silence to endear;

What birds she tamed, what flowers the ground Sent forth her peace to cheer.

To one mute Presence, above all,

Her soothed affections clung,

A picture on the cabin wall

By Russian usage hung---

The Mother-maid, whose countenance bright With love abridged the day;

And, communed with by taper light,

Chased spectral fears away.

And oft as either Guardian came,

The joy in that retreat

Might any common friendship shame,

So high their heart would beat;

And to the lone Recluse, whate'er

They brought, each visiting

Was like the crowding of the year

With a new burst of spring.

But, when she of her Parents thought, The pang was hard to bear;

And, if with all things not enwrought, That trouble still is near.





Before her flight she had not dared

Their constancy to prove,

Too much the heroic Daughter feared

The weakness of their love.

Dark is the past to them, and dark

The future still must be,

Till pitying Saints conduct her bark

Into a safer sea---

Or gentle Nature close her eyes,

And set her Spirit free

From the altar of this sacrifice,

In vestal purity.

Yet, when above the forest-glooms

The white swans southward passed,

High as the pitch of their swift plume Her fancy rode the blast;

And bore her toward the fields of France Her Father's native land,

To mingle in the rustic dance,

The happiest of the band!

Of those beloved fields she oft

Had heard her Father tell

In phrase that now with echoes soft

Haunted her lonely cell;

She saw the hereditary bowers,

She heard the ancestral stream;

The Kremlin and its haughty towers

Forgotten like a dream !

IV

THE ever-changing Moon had traced

Twelve times her monthly round,

When through the unfrequented Waste

Was heard a startling sound;

A shout thrice sent from one who chased At speed a wounded deer,

Bounding through branches interlaced, And where the wood was clear.

The fainting creature took the marsh, And toward the Island fled,

While plovers screamed with tumult harsh Above his antlered head;

This, Ina saw; and, pale with fear,

Shrunk to her citadel;

The desperate deer rushed on, and near The tangled covert fell.

Across the marsh, the game in view,





The Hunter followed fast,

Nor paused, till o'er the stag he blew A death-proclaiming blast;

Then, resting on her upright mind,

Came forth the Maid---'In me

Behold,' she said, ' a stricken Hind

Pursued by destiny!

'From your deportment, Sir! I deem

That you have worn a sword,

And will not hold in light esteem

A suffering woman's word;

There is my covert, there perchance

I might have lain concealed,

My fortunes hid, my countenance

Not even to you revealed.

'Tears might be shed, and I might pray, Crouching and terrified,

That what has been unveiled to day,

You would in mystery hide;

But I will not defile with dust

The knee that bend to adore

The God in heaven;---attend, be just; This ask I, and no more!

'I speak not of the winter's cold,

For summer's heat exchanged,

While I have lodged in this rough hold, From social life estranged;

Nor yet of trouble and alarms:

High Heaven is my defence;

And every season has soft arms

For injured Innocence.

'From Moscow to the Wilderness

It was my choice to come,

Lest virtue should be harborless,

And honor want a home;

And happy were I, if the Czar

Retain his lawless will,

To end life here like this poor deer, Or a lamb on a green hill.'

'Are you the Maid,' the Stranger cried,

'From Gallic parents sprung,

Whose vanishing was rumored wide,

Sad theme for every tongue;

Who foiled an Emperor's eager quest?

You, Lady, forced to wear

These rude habiliments, and rest

Your head in this dark lair!'





But wonder, pity, soon were quelled;

And in her face and mien

The soul's pure brightness she beheld Without a veil between:

He loved, he hoped,---a holy flame

Kindled 'mid rapturous tears;

The passion of a moment came

As on the wings of years.

'Such bounty is no gift of chance,'

Exclaimed he; 'righteous Heaven,

Preparing your deliverance,

To me the charge hath given.

The Czar full oft in words, and deeds Is stormy and self-willed;

But, when the Lady Catherine pleads,

His violence is stilled.

'Leave open to my wish the course,

And I to her will go;

From that humane and heavenly source, Good, only good, can flow.''

Faint sanction given, the Cavalier

Was eager to depart,

Though question followed question, dear To the Maiden's filial heart.

Light was his step,---his hopes, more light, Kept pace with his desires;

And the fifth morning gave him sight

Of Moscow's glittering spires.

He sued:---heart-smitten by the wrong, To the lorn Fugitive

The Emperor sent a pledge as strong

As sovereign power could give.

O more than mighty change! If e'er

Amazement rose to pain,

And joy's excess produced a fear

Of something void and vain;

'Twas when the Parents, who had mourned So long the lost as dead,

Beheld their only Child returned,

The household floor to tread.

Soon gratitude gave way to love

Within the Maiden's breast:

Delivered and Deliverer move

In bridal garments drest;

Meek Catherine had her own reward;

The Czar bestowed a dower;





And universal Moscow shared

The triumph of that hour.

Flowers strewed the ground; the nuptial feast Was held with costly state;

And there, 'mid many a noble guest,

The foster-parent sate;

Encouraged by the imperial eye,

They shrank not into shade;

Great as their bliss, the honor high

To them and nature paid!

William Wordsworth





The Sailor's Mother

ONE morning (raw it was and wet---

A foggy day in winter time)

A Woman on the road I met,

Not old, though something past her prime: Majestic in her person, tall and straight; And like a Roman matron's was her mien and gait.

The ancient spirit is not dead;

Old times, thought I, are breathing there; Proud was I that my country bred

Such strength, a dignity so fair:

She begged an alms, like one in poor estate; I looked at her again, nor did my pride abate.

When from these lofty thoughts I woke,

'What is it,' said I, 'that you bear, Beneath the covert of your Cloak,

Protected from this cold damp air? '

She anwered, soon as she the question heard,

'A simple burthen, Sir, a little Singing-bird.'

And, thus continuing, she said,

'I had a Son, who many a day

Sailed on the seas, but he is dead;

In Denmark he was cast away:

And I have travelled weary miles to see If aught which he had owned might still remain for me.

The bird and cage they both were his:

'Twas my Son's bird; and neat and trim He kept it: many voyages

The singing-bird had gone with him;

When last he sailed, he left the bird behind; From bodings, as might be, that hung upon his mind.

He to a fellow-lodger's care

Had left it, to be watched and fed,

And pipe its song in safety;---there

I found it when my Son was dead;

And now, God help me for my little wit!

I bear it with me, Sir;---he took so much delight in it.'

William Wordsworth





The Seven Sisters

Or, The Solitude Of Binnorie

SEVEN Daughter had Lord Archibald,

All children of one mother:

You could not say in one short day

What love they bore each other.

A garland, of seven lilies, wrought!

Seven sisters that together dwell;

But he, bold Knight as ever fought,

Their Father, took of them no thought, He loved the wars so well.

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

Fresh blows the wind, a western wind, And from the shores of Erin,

Across the wave, a Rover brave

To Binnorie is steering:

Right onward to the Scottish strand

The gallant ship is borne;

The warriors leap upon the land,

And hark! the Leader of the band

Hath blown his bugle horn.

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

Beside a grotto of their own,

With boughs above them closing,

The Seven are laid, and in the shade

They lie like fawns reposing.

But now, upstarting with affright

At noise of man and steed,

Away they fly to left, to rightÑ

Of your fair household, Father-knight, Methinks you take small heed!

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

Away the even fair Campbells fly,

And, over hill and hollow,

With menace proud, and insult loud,

The youthful Rovers follow.

Cried they, 'Your Father loves to roam: Enough for him to find

The empty house when he comes home;

For us your yellow ringlets comb,

For us be fair and kind!'

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

Some close behind, some side to side, Like clouds in stormy weather;





They run, and cry, 'Nay, let us die,

And let us die together.'

A lake was near; the shore was steep; There never foot had been;

They ran, and with a deperate leap

Together plunged into the deep,

Nor ever more were seen.

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

The stream that flows out of the lake, As through the glen it rambles,

Repeats a moan o'er moss and stone,

For those seven lovely Campbells.

Seven little Islands, green and bare, Have risen from out the deep:

The fishers say, those sisters fair,

By faeries all are buried there,

And there together sleep.

Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,

The solitude of Binnorie!

William Wordsworth





The Shepherd, Looking Eastward, Softly Said The Shepherd, looking eastward, softly said,

"Bright is thy veil, O Moon, as thou art bright!"

Forthwith, that little cloud, in ether spread And penetrated all with tender light, She cast away, and showed her fulgent head Uncovered; dazzling the Beholder's sight As if to vindicate her beauty's right Her beauty thoughtlessly disparaged.

Meanwhile that veil, removed or thrown aside, Went floating from her, darkening as it went; And a huge mass, to bury or to hide,

Approached this glory of the firmament; Who meekly yields, and is obscured--content With one calm triumph of a modest pride.

William Wordsworth





The Simplon Pass

-Brook and road

Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy Pass, And with them did we journey several hours At a slow step. The immeasurable height Of woods decaying, never to be decayed, The stationary blasts of waterfalls,

And in the narrow rent, at every turn, Winds thwarting winds bewildered and forlorn, The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky, The rocks that muttered close upon our ears, Black drizzling crags that spake by the wayside As if a voice were in them, the sick sight And giddy prospect of the raving stream, The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens, Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light--

Were all like workings of one mind, the features Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree, Characters of the great Apocalypse,

The types and symbols of Eternity,

Of first and last, and midst, and without end.

William Wordsworth





The Solitary Reaper

Behold her, single in the field,

Yon solitary Highland Lass!

Reaping and singing by herself;

Stop here, or gently pass!

Alone she cuts and binds the grain,

And sings a melancholy strain;

O listen! for the Vale profound

Is overflowing with the sound.

No Nightingale did ever chaunt

More welcome notes to weary bands

Of travellers in some shady haunt,

Among Arabian sands:

A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard

In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird,

Breaking the silence of the seas

Among the farthest Hebrides.

Will no one tell me what she sings?--

Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow

For old, unhappy, far-off things,

And battles long ago:

Or is it some more humble lay,

Familiar matter of to-day?

Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain,

That has been, and may be again?

Whate'er the theme, the Maiden sang

As if her song could have no ending;

I saw her singing at her work,

And o'er the sickle bending;--

I listened, motionless and still;

And, as I mounted up the hill,

The music in my heart I bore,

Long after it was heard no more.

William Wordsworth





The Sonnet i

NUNS fret not at their convent's narrow room, And hermits are contented with their cells, And students with their pensive citadels; Maids at the wheel, the weaver at his loom, Sit blithe and happy; bees that soar for bloom, High as the highest peak of Furness fells, Will murmur by the hour in foxglove bells: In truth the prison unto which we doom Ourselves no prison is: and hence for me, In sundry moods, 'twas pastime to be bound Within the Sonnet's scanty plot of ground; Pleased if some souls (for such there needs must be) Who have felt the weight of too much liberty, Should find brief solace there, as I have found.

William Wordsworth





The Sonnet ii

SCORN not the Sonnet; Critic, you have frown'd, Mindless of its just honours; with this key Shakespeare unlock'd his heart; the melody Of this small lute gave ease to Petrarch's wound; A thousand times this pipe did Tasso sound; With it Camöens sooth'd an exile's grief; The Sonnet glitter'd a gay myrtle leaf Amid the cypress with which Dante crown'd His visionary brow: a glow-worm lamp, It cheer'd mild Spenser, call'd from Faery-land To struggle through dark ways; and when a damp Fell round the path of Milton, in his hand The Thing became a trumpet; whence he blew Soul-animating strains--alas, too few!

William Wordsworth





The Sparrow's Nest

BEHOLD, within the leafy shade,

Those bright blue eggs together laid!

On me the chance-discovered sight

Gleamed like a vision of delight.

I started---seeming to espy

The home and sheltered bed,

The Sparrow's dwelling, which, hard by My Father' house, in wet or dry

My sister Emmeline and I

Together visited.

She looked at it and seemed to fear it; Dreading, tho' wishing, to be near it: Such heart was in her, being then

A little Prattler among men.

The Blessing of my later year

Was with me when a boy:

She gave me eyes, she gave me ears;

And humble care, and delicate fears;

A heart, the fountain of sweet tears; And love, and thought, and joy.

William Wordsworth





The Sun Has Long Been Set

The sun has long been set,

The stars are out by twos and threes, The little birds are piping yet

Among the bushes and the trees;

There's a cuckoo, and one or two thrushes, And a far-off wind that rushes,

And a sound of water that gushes,

And the cuckoo's sovereign cry

Fills all the hollow of the sky.

Who would gòparading'

In London, ànd masquerading',

On such a night of June

With that beautiful soft half-moon,

And all these innocent blisses?

On such a night as this is!

William Wordsworth





The Tables Turned

Up! up! my Friend, and quit your books; Or surely you'll grow double:

Up! up! my Friend, and clear your looks; Why all this toil and trouble?

The sun above the mountain's head,

A freshening lustre mellow

Through all the long green fields has spread, His first sweet evening yellow.

Books! 'tis a dull and endless strife: Come, hear the woodland linnet,

How sweet his music! on my life,

There's more of wisdom in it.

And hark! how blithe the throstle sings!

He, too, is no mean preacher:

Come forth into the light of things,

Let Nature be your teacher.

She has a world of ready wealth,

Our minds and hearts to bless--

Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health, Truth breathed by cheerfulness.

One impulse from a vernal wood

May teach you more of man,

Of moral evil and of good,

Than all the sages can.

Sweet is the lore which Nature brings; Our meddling intellect

Mis-shapes the beauteous forms of things:--

We murder to dissect.

Enough of Science and of Art;

Close up those barren leaves;

Come forth, and bring with you a heart That watches and receives.

William Wordsworth





The Trosachs

THERE 's not a nook within this solemn Pass, But were an apt confessional for one

Taught by his summer spent, his autumn gone, That Life is but a tale of morning grass Wither'd at eve. From scenes of art which chase That thought away, turn, and with watchful eyes Feed it 'mid Nature's old felicities, Rocks, rivers, and smooth lakes more clear than glass Untouch'd, unbreathed upon. Thrice happy quest, If from a golden perch of aspen spray (October's workmanship to rival May)

The pensive warbler of the ruddy breast That moral sweeten by a heaven-taught lay, Lulling the year, with all its cares, to rest!

William Wordsworth





The Two April Mornings

We walked along, while bright and red Uprose the morning sun;

And Matthew stopped, he looked, and said

`The will of God be done!'

A village schoolmaster was he,

With hair of glittering grey;

As blithe a man as you could see

On a spring holiday.

And on that morning, through the grass And by the steaming rills

We travelled merrily, to pass

A day among the hills.

Òur work,' said I, `was well begun;

Then, from thy breast what thought,

Beneath so beautiful a sun,

So sad a sigh has brought?'

A second time did Matthew stop;

And fixing still his eye

Upon the eastern mountain-top,

To me he made reply:

`Yon cloud with that long purple cleft Brings fresh into my mind

A day like this, which I have left

Full thirty years behind.

Ànd just above yon slope of corn

Such colours, and no other,

Were in the sky, that April morn,

Of this the very brother.

`With rod and line I sued the sport

Which that sweet season gave,

And, to the churchyard come, stopped short Beside my daughter's grave.

`Nine summers had she scarcely seen,

The pride of all the vale;

And then she sang: -she would have been A very nightingale.

`Six feet in earth my Emma lay;

And yet I loved her more -

For so it seemed, -than till that day I e'er had loved before.

Ànd turning from her grave, I met

Beside the churchyard yew





A blooming girl, whose hair was wet

With points of morning dew.

À basket on her head she bare;

Her brow was smooth and white:

To see a child so very fair,

It was a pure delight!

`No fountain from its rocky cave

E'er tripped with foot so free;

She seemed as happy as a wave

That dances on the sea.

`There came from me a sigh of pain

Which I could ill confine;

I looked at her, and looked again:

And did not wish her mine!'

- Matthew is in his grave, yet now

Methinks I see him stand

As that moment, with a bough

Of wilding in his hand.

William Wordsworth





The Virgin

. Mother! whose virgin bosom was uncrost With the least shade of thought to sin allied.

Woman! above all women glorified,

Our tainted nature's solitary boast;

Purer than foam on central ocean tost; Brighter than eastern skies at daybreak strewn With fancied roses, than the unblemished moon Before her wane begins on heaven's blue coast; Thy image falls to earth. Yet some, I ween, Not unforgiven the suppliant knee might bend, As to a visible Power, in which did blend All that was mixed and reconciled in thee Of mother's love with maiden purity,

Of high with low, celestial with terrene!

William Wordsworth





The Wishing Gate

[In the vale of Grasmere, by the side of an old highway leading to Ambleside, is a gate, which, from time out of mind, has been called the Wishing-gate, from a belief that wishes formed or indulged there have a favorable issue.]

HOPE rules a land forever green:

All powers that serve the bright-eyed Queen Are confident and gay;

Clouds at her bidding disappear;

Points she to aught?---the bliss draws near, And Fancy smooths the way.

Not such the land of Wishes---there

Dwell fruitless day-dreams, lawless prayer, And thoughts with things at strife;

Yet how forlorn, should ye depart

Ye superstitions of the heart,

How poor, were human life!

When magic lore abjured its might,

Ye did not forfeit one dear right,

One tender claim abate;

Witness this symbol of your sway,

Surnving near the public way,

The rustic Wishing-gate!

Inquire not if the faery race

Shed kindly influence on the place,

Ere northward they retired;

If here a warrior left a spell,

Panting for glory as he fell;

Or here a saint expired.

Enough that all arouud is fair,

Composed with Nature's finest care,

And in her fondest love---

Peace to embosom and content---

To overawe the turbulent,

The selfish to reprove.

Yea! even the Stranger from afar,

Reclining on this moss-grown bar,

Unknowing, and unknown,

The infection of the ground partakes, Longing for his Beloved---who maker

All happiness her own.

Then why should conscious Spirits fear The mystic stirrings that are here,

The ancient faith disclaim?

The local Genius ne'er befriends

Desires whose course in folly ends,





Whose just reward is shame.

Smile if thou wilt, but not in scorn, If some, by ceaseless pains outworn,

Here crave an easier lot;

If some have thirsted to renew

A broken vow, or bind a true,

With firmer, holier knot.

And not in vain, when thoughts are cast Upon the irrevocable past,

Some Penitent sincere

May for a worthier future sigh,

While trickles from his downcast eye

No unavailing tear.

The Worldling, pining to be freed

From turmoil, who would turn or speed The current of his fate,

Might stop before this favored scene, At Nature's call, nor blush to lean

Upon the Wishing-gate.

The Sage, who feels how blind, how weak Is man, though loth such help to seek, Yet, passing, here might pause,

And thirst for insight to allay

Misgiving, while the crimson day

In quietness withdraws;

Or when the church-clock's knell profound To Time's first step across the bound Of midnight makes reply;

Time pressing on with starry crest,

To filial sleep upon the breast

Of dread eternity.

William Wordsworth





The World

THE world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers: Little we see in Nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!

This sea that bares her bosom to the moon; The winds that will be howling at all hours, And are up-gather'd now like sleeping flowers; For this, for everything, we are out of tune; It moves us not.--Great God! I'd rather be A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;

So might I, standing on this pleasant lea, Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn; Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea; Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.

William Wordsworth





The World Is To Much With Us

The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers: Little we see in Nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!

This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon; The winds that will be howling at all hours, And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers; For this, for everything, we are out of tune, It moves us not.--Great God! I'd rather be A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;

So might I, standing on this pleasant lea, Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn; Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea; Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.

William Wordsworth





The World is Too Much With Us

The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers: Little we see in Nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!

This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon; The winds that will be howling at all hours, And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers; For this, for everything, we are out of tune; It moves us not. - Great God! I'd rather be A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;

So might I, standing on this pleasant lea, Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea; Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn.

William Wordsworth





The world is too much with us; late and soon The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers; Little we see in Nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!

This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon; The winds that will be howling at all hours, And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers, For this, for everything, we are out of tune; It moves us not.--Great God!I'd rather be A pagan suckled in a creed outworn;

So might I, standing on this pleasant lea, Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn; Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea; Or hear old Triton blow his wreath&egrave;d horn.

William Wordsworth





There is an Eminence,--of these our hills There is an Eminence,--of these our hills The last that parleys with the setting sun; We can behold it from our orchard-seat; And, when at evening we pursue out walk Along the public way, this Peak, so high Above us, and so distant in its height, Is visible; and often seems to send

Its own deep quiet to restore our hearts.

The meteors make of it a favourite haunt: The star of Jove, so beautiful and large In the mid heavens, is never half so fair As when he shines above it. 'Tis in truth The loneliest place we have among the clouds.

And She who dwells with me, whom I have loved With such communion, that no place on earth Can ever be a solitude to me,

Hath to this lonely Summit given my Name.

William Wordsworth





There was a Boy

There was a Boy; ye knew him well, ye cliffs And islands of Winander!--many a time, At evening, when the earliest stars began To move along the edges of the hills, Rising or setting, would he stand alone, Beneath the trees, or by the glimmering lake; And there, with fingers interwoven, both hands Pressed closely palm to palm and to his mouth Uplifted, he, as through an instrument, Blew mimic hootings to the silent owls, That they might answer him.--And they would shout Across the watery vale, and shout again, Responsive to his call,--with quivering peals, And long halloos, and screams, and echoes loud Redoubled and redoubled; concourse wild Of jocund din! And, when there came a pause Of silence such as baffled his best skill: Then, sometimes, in that silence, while he hung Listening, a gentle shock of mild surprise Has carried far into his heart the voice Of mountain-torrents; or the visible scene Would enter unawares into his mind

With all its solemn imagery, its rocks, Its woods, and that uncertain heaven received Into the bosom of the steady lake.

This boy was taken from his mates, and died In childhood, ere he was full twelve years old.

Pre-eminent in beauty is the vale

Where he was born and bred: the churchyard hangs Upon a slope above the village-school; And, through that church-yard when my way has led On summer-evenings, I believe, that there A long half-hour together I have stood Mute--looking at the grave in which he lies!

William Wordsworth





Thorn, The

I

"There is a Thorn--it looks so old, In truth, you'd find it hard to say

How it could ever have been young,

It looks so old and grey.

Not higher than a two years' child

It stands erect, this aged Thorn;

No leaves it has, no prickly points;

It is a mass of knotted joints,

A wretched thing forlorn.

It stands erect, and like a stone

With lichens is it overgrown.

II

"Like rock or stone, it is o'ergrown, With lichens to the very top,

And hung with heavy tufts of moss,

A melancholy crop:

Up from the earth these mosses creep, And this poor Thorn they clasp it round So close, you'd say that they are bent With plain and manifest intent

To drag it to the ground;

And all have joined in one endeavour

To bury this poor Thorn for ever.

III

"High on a mountain's highest ridge, Where oft the stormy winter gale

Cuts like a scythe, while through the clouds It sweeps from vale to vale;

Not five yards from the mountain path, This Thorn you on your left espy;

And to the left, three yards beyond,

You see a little muddy pond

Of water--never dry

Though but of compass small, and bare To thirsty suns and parching air.

IV

"And, close beside this aged Thorn, There is a fresh and lovely sight,

A beauteous heap, a hill of moss,

Just half a foot in height.

All lovely colours there you see,

All colours that were ever seen;

And mossy network too is there,

As if by hand of lady fair





The work had woven been;

And cups, the darlings of the eye,

So deep is their vermilion dye.

V

"Ah me! what lovely tints are there Of olive green and scarlet bright,

In spikes, in branches, and in stars, Green, red, and pearly white!

This heap of earth o'ergrown with moss, Which close beside the Thorn you see, So fresh in all its beauteous dyes,

Is like an infant's grave in size,

As like as like can be:

But never, never any where,

An infant's grave was half so fair.

VI

"Now would you see this aged Thorn, This pond, and beauteous hill of moss, You must take care and choose your time The mountain when to cross.

For oft there sits between the heap

So like an infant's grave in size,

And that same pond of which I spoke,

A Woman in a scarlet cloak,

And to herself she cries,

'Oh misery! oh misery!

Oh woe is me! oh misery!'

VII

"At all times of the day and night This wretched Woman thither goes;

And she is known to every star,

And every wind that blows;

And there, beside the Thorn, she sits When the blue daylight's in the skies, And when the whirlwind's on the hill, Or frosty air is keen and still,

And to herself she cries,

'Oh misery! oh misery!

Oh woe is me! oh misery!'"

VIII

"Now wherefore, thus, by day and night, In rain, in tempest, and in snow,

Thus to the dreary mountain-top

Does this poor Woman go?





And why sits she beside the Thorn

When the blue daylight's in the sky

Or when the whirlwind's on the hill,

Or frosty air is keen and still,

And wherefore does she cry?--

O wherefore? wherefore? tell me why

Does she repeat that doleful cry?"

IX

"I cannot tell; I wish I could;

For the true reason no one knows:

But would you gladly view the spot,

The spot to which she goes;

The hillock like an infant's grave,

The pond--and Thorn, so old and grey; Pass by her door--'tis seldom shut--

And, if you see her in her hut--

Then to the spot away!

I never heard of such as dare

Approach the spot when she is there."

X

"But wherefore to the mountain-top Can this unhappy Woman go?

Whatever star is in the skies,

Whatever wind may blow?"

"Full twenty years are past and gone Since she (her name is Martha Ray)

Gave with a maiden's true good-will

Her company to Stephen Hill;

And she was blithe and gay,

While friends and kindred all approved Of him whom tenderly she loved.

XI

"And they had fixed the wedding day, The morning that must wed them both;

But Stephen to another Maid

Had sworn another oath;

And, with this other Maid, to church

Unthinking Stephen went--

Poor Martha! on that woeful day

A pang of pitiless dismay

Into her soul was sent;

A fire was kindled in her breast,

Which might not burn itself to rest.

XII





"They say, full six months after this, While yet the summer leaves were green, She to the mountain-top would go,

And there was often seen.

What could she seek?--or wish to hide?

Her state to any eye was plain;

She was with child, and she was mad;

Yet often was she sober sad

From her exceeding pain.

O guilty Father--would that death

Had saved him from that breach of faith!

XIII

Sad case for such a brain to hold

Communion with a stirring child!

Sad case, as you may think, for one

Who had a brain so wild!

Last Christmas-eve we talked of this, And grey-haired Wilfred of the glen

Held that the unborn infant wrought

About its mother's heart, and brought Her senses back again:

And, when at last her time drew near, Her looks were calm, her senses clear.

XIV

"More know I not, I wish I did,

And it should all be told to you;

For what became of this poor child

No mortal ever knew;

Nay--if a child to her was born

No earthly tongue could ever tell;

And if 'twas born alive or dead,

Far less could this with proof be said; But some remember well,

That Martha Ray about this time

Would up the mountain often climb.

XV

"And all that winter, when at night The wind blew from the mountain-peak,

'Twas worth your while, though in the dark, The churchyard path to seek:

For many a time and oft were heard

Cries coming from the mountain head:

Some plainly living voices were;

And others, I've heard many swear,

Were voices of the dead:

I cannot think, whate'er they say,





They had to do with Martha Ray.

XVI

"But that she goes to this old Thorn, The Thorn which I described to you,

And there sits in a scarlet cloak

I will be sworn is true.

For one day with my telescope,

To view the ocean wide and bright,

When to this country first I came,

Ere I had heard of Martha's name,

I climbed the mountain's height:--

A storm came on, and I could see

No object higher than my knee.

XVII

"'Twas mist and rain, and storm and rain: No screen, no fence could I discover; And then the wind! in sooth, it was

A wind full ten times over.

I looked around, I thought I saw

A jutting crag,--and off I ran,

Head-foremost, through the driving rain, The shelter of the crag to gain;

And, as I am a man,

Instead of jutting crag, I found

A Woman seated on the ground.

XVIII

"I did not speak--I saw her face; Her face!--it was enough for me;

I turned about and heard her cry,

'Oh misery! oh misery!'

And there she sits, until the moon

Through half the clear blue sky will go; And, when the little breezes make

The waters of the pond to shake,

As all the country know,

She shudders, and you hear her cry,

'Oh misery! oh misery!'"

XIX

"But what's the Thorn? and what the pond?

And what the hill of moss to her?

And what the creeping breeze that comes The little pond to stir?"

"I cannot tell; but some will say She hanged her baby on the tree;





Some say she drowned it in the pond,

Which is a little step beyond:

But all and each agree,

The little Babe was buried there,

Beneath that hill of moss so fair.

XX

"I've heard, the moss is spotted red With drops of that poor infant's blood; But kill a new-born infant thus,

I do not think she could!

Some say, if to the pond you go,

And fix on it a steady view,

The shadow of a babe you trace,

A baby and a baby's face,

And that it looks at you;

Whene'er you look on it, 'tis plain

The baby looks at you again.

XXI

"And some had sworn an oath that she Should be to public justice brought;

And for the little infant's bones

With spades they would have sought.

But instantly the hill of moss

Before their eyes began to stir!

And, for full fifty yards around,

The grass--it shook upon the ground!

Yet all do still aver

The little Babe lies buried there,

Beneath that hill of moss so fair.

XXII

"I cannot tell how this may be,

But plain it is the Thorn is bound

With heavy tufts of moss that strive

To drag it to the ground;

And this I know, full many a time,

When she was on the mountain high,

By day, and in the silent night,

When all the stars shone clear and bright, That I have heard her cry,

'Oh misery! oh misery!

Oh woe is me! oh misery!'"

William Wordsworth





Three Years She Grew

THREE years she grew in sun and shower, Then Nature said, 'A lovelier flower

On earth was never sown;

This Child I to myself will take;

She shall be mine, and I will make

A Lady of my own.

'Myself will to my darling be

Both law and impulse: and with me

The Girl, in rock and plain

In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, Shall feel an overseeing power

To kindle or restrain.

'She shall be sportive as the fawn

That wild with glee across the lawn

Or up the mountain springs;

And her's shall be the breathing balm, And her's the silence and the calm

Of mute insensate things.

'The floating clouds their state shall lend To her; for her the willow bend;

Nor shall she fail to see

Even in the motions of the Storm

Grace that shall mold the Maiden's form By silent sympathy.

'The stars of midnight shall be dear

To her; and she shall lean her ear

In many a secret place

Where rivulets dance their wayward round, And beauty born of murmuring sound

Shall pass into her face.

'And vital feelings of delight

Shall rear her form to stately height, Her virgin bosom swell;

Such thoughts to Lucy I will give

While she and I together live

Here in this happy dell.'

Thus Nature spake---The work was done---

How soon my Lucy's race was run!

She died, and left to me

This heath, this calm, and quiet scene; The memory of what has been,

And never more will be.

William Wordsworth





Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower, Three years she grew in sun and shower, Then Nature said, "A lovelier flower On earth was never sown;

This Child I to myself will take;

She shall be mine, and I will make

A Lady of my own.

"Myself will to my darling be

Both law and impulse: and with me

The Girl, in rock and plain

In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, Shall feel an overseeing power

To kindle or restrain.

"She shall be sportive as the fawn That wild with glee across the lawn

Or up the mountain springs;

And her's shall be the breathing balm, And her's the silence and the calm

Of mute insensate things.

"The floating clouds their state shall lend To her; for her the willow bend;

Nor shall she fail to see

Even in the motions of the Storm

Grace that shall mold the Maiden's form By silent sympathy.

"The stars of midnight shall be dear To her; and she shall lean her ear

In many a secret place

Where rivulets dance their wayward round, And beauty born of murmuring sound

Shall pass into her face.

"And vital feelings of delight

Shall rear her form to stately height, Her virgin bosom swell;

Such thoughts to Lucy I will give

While she and I together live

Here in this happy dell."

Thus Nature spake---The work was done---

How soon my Lucy's race was run!

She died, and left to me

This heath, this calm, and quiet scene; The memory of what has been,

And never more will be.

William Wordsworth





'Tis Said, That Some Have Died For Love

'Tis said, that some have died for love: And here and there a churchyard grave is found In the cold north's unhallowed ground, Because the wretched man himself had slain, His love was such a grievous pain.

And there is one whom I five years have known; He dwells alone

Upon Helvellyn's side:

He loved--the pretty Barbara died;

And thus he makes his moan:

Three years had Barbara in her grave been laid When thus his moan he made:

"Oh, move, thou Cottage, from behind that oak!

Or let the aged tree uprooted lie,

That in some other way yon smoke

May mount into the sky!

The clouds pass on; they from the heavens depart.

I look--the sky is empty space;

I know not what I trace;

But when I cease to look, my hand is on my heart.

"Oh! what a weight is in these shades! Ye leaves, That murmur once so dear, when will it cease?

Your sound my heart of rest bereaves, It robs my heart of peace.

Thou Thrush, that singest loud--and loud and free, Into yon row of willows flit,

Upon that alder sit;

Or sing another song, or choose another tree.

"Roll back, sweet Rill! back to thy mountain-bounds, And there for ever be thy waters chained!

For thou dost haunt the air with sounds That cannot be sustained;

If still beneath that pine-tree's ragged bough Headlong yon waterfall must come,

Oh let it then be dumb!

Be anything, sweet Rill, but that which thou art now.

"Thou Eglantine, so bright with sunny showers, Proud as a rainbow spanning half the vale, Thou one fair shrub, oh! shed thy flowers, And stir not in the gale.

For thus to see thee nodding in the air, To see thy arch thus stretch and bend, Thus rise and thus descend,--

Disturbs me till the sight is more than I can dear."

The Man who makes this feverish complaint Is one of giant stature, who could dance Equipped from head to foot in iron mail.





Ah gentle Love! if ever thought was thine To store up kindred hours for me, thy face Turn from me, gentle Love! nor let me walk Within the sound of Emma's voice, nor know Such happiness as I have known to-day.

William Wordsworth





To A Butterfly

STAY near me---do not take thy flight!

A little longer stay in sight!

Much converse do I find I thee,

Historian of my infancy !

Float near me; do not yet depart!

Dead times revive in thee:

Thou bring'st, gay creature as thou art!

A solemn image to my heart,

My father's family!

Oh! pleasant, pleasant were the days, The time, when, in our childish plays, My sister Emmeline and I

Together chased the butterfly!

A very hunter did I rush

Upon the prey:---with leaps and spring I followed on from brake to bush;

But she, God love her, feared to brush The dust from off its wings.

William Wordsworth






I'VE watched you now a full half-hour, Self-poised upon that yellow flower;

And, little Butterfly! indeed

I know not if you sleep or feed.

How motionless!---not frozen seas

More motionless! and then

What joy awaits you, when the breeze

Hath found you out among the trees,

And calls you forth again !

This plot of orchard-ground is ours;

My trees they are, my Sister's flowers; Here rest your wing when they are weary; Here lodge as in a sanctuary!

Come often to us, fear no wrong;

Sit near us on the bough!

We'll talk of sunshine and of song,

And summer days, when we were young;

Sweet childish days, that were as long As twenty days are now.

William Wordsworth





To A Butterfly (first poem)

Stay near me---do not take thy flight!

A little longer stay in sight!

Much converse do I find I thee,

Historian of my infancy !

Float near me; do not yet depart!

Dead times revive in thee:

Thou bring'st, gay creature as thou art!

A solemn image to my heart,

My father's family!

Oh! pleasant, pleasant were the days, The time, when, in our childish plays, My sister Emmeline and I

Together chased the butterfly!

A very hunter did I rush

Upon the prey:---with leaps and spring I followed on from brake to bush;

But she, God love her, feared to brush The dust from off its wings.

William Wordsworth





To A Butterfly (second poem)

I've watched you now a full half-hour, Self-poised upon that yellow flower;

And, little Butterfly! indeed

I know not if you sleep or feed.

How motionless!---not frozen seas

More motionless! and then

What joy awaits you, when the breeze

Hath found you out among the trees,

And calls you forth again !

This plot of orchard-ground is ours;

My trees they are, my Sister's flowers; Here rest your wing when they are weary; Here lodge as in a sanctuary!

Come often to us, fear no wrong;

Sit near us on the bough!

We'll talk of sunshine and of song,

And summer days, when we were young;

Sweet childish days, that were as long As twenty days are now.

William Wordsworth





To a Highland Girl (At Inversneyde, upon Loch Lomond)

. Sweet Highland Girl, a very shower Of beauty is thy earthly dower!

Twice seven consenting years have shed Their utmost bounty on thy head:

And these grey rocks; that household lawn; Those trees, a veil just half withdrawn; This fall of water that doth make

A murmur near the silent lake;

This little bay; a quiet road

That holds in shelter thy Abode--

In truth together do ye seem

Like something fashioned in a dream;

Such Forms as from their covert peep

When earthly cares are laid asleep!

But, O fair Creature! in the light

Of common day, so heavenly bright,

I bless Thee, Vision as thou art,

I bless thee with a human heart;

God shield thee to thy latest years!

Thee, neither know I, nor thy peers;

And yet my eyes are filled with tears.

With earnest feeling I shall pray

For thee when I am far away:

For never saw I mien, or face,

In which more plainly I could trace

Benignity and home-bred sense

Ripening in perfect innocence.

Here scattered, like a random seed,

Remote from men, Thou dost not need

The embarrassed look of shy distress, And maidenly shamefacedness:

Thou wear'st upon thy forehead clear

The freedom of a Mountaineer:

A face with gladness overspread!

Soft smiles, by human kindness bred!

And seemliness complete, that sways

Thy courtesies, about thee plays;

With no restraint, but such as springs From quick and eager visitings

Of thoughts that lie beyond the reach Of thy few words of English speech:

A bondage sweetly brooked, a strife

That gives thy gestures grace and life!

So have I, not unmoved in mind,

Seen birds of tempest-loving kind--

Thus beating up against the wind.

What hand but would a garland cull

For thee who art so beautiful?

O happy pleasure! here to dwell

Beside thee in some heathy dell;





Adopt your homely ways, and dress,

A Shepherd, thou a Shepherdess!

But I could frame a wish for thee

More like a grave reality:

Thou art to me but as a wave

Of the wild sea; and I would have

Some claim upon thee, if I could,

Though but of common neighbourhood.

What joy to hear thee, and to see!

Thy elder Brother I would be,

Thy Father--anything to thee!

Now thanks to Heaven! that of its grace Hath led me to this lonely place.

Joy have I had; and going hence

I bear away my recompense.

In spots like these it is we prize

Our Memory, feel that she hath eyes:

Then, why should I be loth to stir?

I feel this place was made for her;

To give new pleasure like the past,

Continued long as life shall last.

Nor am I loth, though pleased at heart, Sweet Highland Girl! from thee to part; For I, methinks, till I grow old,

As fair before me shall behold,

As I do now, the cabin small,

The lake, the bay, the waterfall;

And thee, the spirit of them all!

William Wordsworth





To A Sexton

Let thy wheel-barrow alone--

Wherefore, Sexton, piling still

In thy bone-house bone on bone?

'Tis already like a hill

In a field of battle made,

Where three thousand skulls are laid; These died in peace each with the other,--

Father, sister, friend, and brother.

Mark the spot to which I point!

From this platform, eight feet square, Take not even a finger-joint:

Andrew's whole fire-side is there.

Here, alone, before thine eyes,

Simon's sickly daughter lies,

From weakness now, and pain defended, Whom he twenty winters tended.

Look but at the gardener's pride--

How he glories, when he sees

Roses, lilies, side by side,

Violets in families!

By the heart of Man, his tears,

By his hopes and by his fears,

Thou, too heedless, art the Warden

Of a far superior garden.

Thus then, each to other dear,

Let them all in quiet lie,

Andrew there, and Susan here,

Neighbours in mortality.

And, should I live through sun and rain Seven widowed years without my Jane,

O Sexton, do not then remove her,

Let one grave hold the Loved and Lover!

William Wordsworth





To a Skylark

Ethereal minstrel! pilgrim of the sky!

Dost thou despise the earth where cares abound?

Or, while the wings aspire, are heart and eye Both with thy nest upon the dewy ground?

Thy nest which thou canst drop into at will, Those quivering wings composed, that music still!

Leave to the nightingale her shady wood; A privacy of glorious light is thine; Whence thou dost pour upon the world a flood Of harmony, with instinct more divine; Type of the wise who soar, but never roam; True to the kindred points of Heaven and Home!

William Wordsworth





To a Sky-Lark

Up with me! up with me into the clouds!

For thy song, Lark, is strong;

Up with me, up with me into the clouds!

Singing, singing,

With clouds and sky about thee ringing, Lift me, guide me till I find

That spot which seems so to thy mind!

I have walked through wildernesses dreary And to-day my heart is weary;

Had I now the wings of a Faery,

Up to thee would I fly.

There is madness about thee, and joy divine In that song of thine;

Lift me, guide me high and high

To thy banqueting-place in the sky.

Joyous as morning

Thou art laughing and scorning;

Thou hast a nest for thy love and thy rest, And, though little troubled with sloth, Drunken Lark! thou would'st be loth

To be such a traveller as I.

Happy, happy Liver,

With a soul as strong as a mountain river Pouring out praise to the Almighty Giver, Joy and jollity be with us both!

Alas! my journey, rugged and uneven,

Through prickly moors or dusty ways must wind; But hearing thee, or others of thy kind, As full of gladness and as free of heaven, I, with my fate contented, will plod on, And hope for higher raptures, when life's day is done.

William Wordsworth





To Joanna

Amid the smoke of cities did you pass The time of early youth; and there you learned, From years of quiet industry, to love The living Beings by your own fireside, With such a strong devotion, that your heart Is slow to meet the sympathies of them Who look upon the hills with tenderness, And make dear friendships with the streams and groves.

Yet we, who are transgressors in this kind, Dwelling retired in our simplicity

Among the woods and fields, we love you well, Joanna! and I guess, since you have been So distant from us now for two long years, That you will gladly listen to discourse, However trivial, if you thence be taught That they, with whom you once were happy, talk Familiarly of you and of old times.

While I was seated, now some ten days past, Beneath those lofty firs, that overtop Their ancient neighbour, the old steeple-tower, The Vicar from his gloomy house hard by Came forth to greet me; and when he had asked,

"How fares Joanna, that wild-hearted Maid!

And when will she return to us?" he paused; And, after short exchange of village news, He with grave looks demanded, for what cause, Reviving obsolete idolatry,

I, like a Runic Priest, in characters Of formidable size had chiselled out

Some uncouth name upon the native rock, Above the Rotha, by the forest-side.

--Now, by those dear immunities of heart Engendered between malice and true love, I was not loth to be so catechised,

And this was my reply:--"As it befell, One summer morning we had walked abroad At break of day, Joanna and myself.

--'Twas that delightful season when the broom, Full-flowered, and visible on every steep, Along the copses runs in veins of gold.

Our pathway led us on to Rotha's banks; And when we came in front of that tall rock That eastward looks, I there stopped short--and stood Tracing the lofty barrier with my eye From base to summit; such delight I found To note in shrub and tree, in stone and flower That intermixture of delicious hues,

Along so vast a surface, all at once, In one impression, by connecting force Of their own beauty, imaged in the heart.

--When I had gazed perhaps two minutes' space, Joanna, looking in my eyes, beheld





That ravishment of mine, and laughed aloud.

The Rock, like something starting from a sleep, Took up the Lady's voice, and laughed again; That ancient Woman seated on Helm-crag Was ready with her cavern; Hammar-scar, And the tall Steep of Silver-how, sent forth A noise of laughter; southern Loughrigg heard, And Fairfield answered with a mountain tone; Helvellyn far into the clear blue sky Carried the Lady's voice,--old Skiddaw blew His speaking-trumpet;--back out of the clouds Of Glaramara southward came the voice; And Kirkstone tossed it from his misty head.

--Now whether (said I to our cordial Friend, Who in the hey-day of astonishment

Smiled in my face) this were in simple truth A work accomplished by the brotherhood Of ancient mountains, or my ear was touched With dreams and visionary impulses

To me alone imparted, sure I am

That there was a loud uproar in the hills.

And, while we both were listening, to my side The fair Joanna drew, as if she wished To shelter from some object of her fear.

--And hence, long afterwards, when eighteen moons Were wasted, as I chanced to walk alone Beneath this rock, at sunrise, on a calm And silent morning, I sat down, and there, In memory of affections old and true, I chiselled out in those rude characters Joanna's name deep in the living stone:--

And I, and all who dwell by my fireside, Have called the lovely rock, JOANNA'S ROCK."

William Wordsworth





To M.H.

Our walk was far among the ancient trees: There was no road, nor any woodman's path; But a thick umbrage--checking the wild growth Of weed and sapling, along soft green turf Beneath the branches--of itself had made A track, that brought us to a slip of lawn, And a small bed of water in the woods.

All round this pool both flocks and herds might drink On its firm margin, even as from a well, Or some stone-basin which the herdsman's hand Had shaped for their refreshment; nor did sun, Or wind from any quarter, ever come,

But as a blessing to this calm recess, This glade of water and this one green field.

The spot was made by Nature for herself; The travellers know it not, and 'twill remain Unknown to them; but it is beautiful; And if a man should plant his cottage near, Should sleep beneath the shelter of its trees, And blend its waters with his daily meal, He would so love it, that in his death-hour Its image would survive among his thoughts: And therefore, my sweet MARY, this still Nook, With all its beeches, we have named from You!

William Wordsworth





To May

THOUGH many suns have risen and set

Since thou, blithe May, wert born,

And Bards, who hailed thee, may forget Thy gift, thy beauty scorn;

There are who to a birthday strain

Confine not harp and voice,

But evermore throughout thy reign

Are grateful and rejoice!

Delicious odor! music sweet,

Too sweet to pass away!

Oh for a deathless song to meet

The soul's desire---a lay

That, when a thousand year are told,

Should praise thee, genial Power!

Through summer heat, autumnal cold,

And winter's dreariest hour.

Earth, sea, thy presence feel---nor less, If yon ethereal blue

With its soft smile the truth express, The heavens have felt it too.

The inmost heart of man if glad

Partakes a livelier cheer;

And eye that cannot but be sad

Let fall a brightened tear.

Since thy return, through days and weeks Of hope that grew by stealth,

How many wan and faded cheeks

Have kindled into health!

The Old, by thee revived, have said,

'Another year is ours;'

And wayworn Wanderers, poorly fed,

Have smiled upon thy flowers.

Who tripping lisps a merry song

Amid his playful peers?

The tender Infant who was long

A prisoner of fond fears;

But now, when every sharp-edged blast Is quiet in its sheath,

His Mother leaves him free to taste

Earth's sweetness in thy breath.

Thy help is with the weed that creeps Along the humblest ground;

No cliff so bare but on its steeps

Thy favors may be found;

But most on some peculiar nook

That our own hands have drest,

Thou and thy train are proud to look,





And seem to love it best.

And yet how pleased we wander forth

When May is whispering, 'Come!

'Choose from the bowers of virgin earth The happiest for your home;

HeavenÕs bounteous love through me is spread From sunshine, clouds, winds, waves,

Drops on the mouldering turret's head, And on your turf-clad graves!'

Such greeting heard, away with sighs

For lilies that must fade,

Or ' the rathe primrose as it dies

Forsaken' in the shade!

Vernal fruitions and desires

Are linked in endless chase;

While, as one kindly growth retires,

Another takes its place.

And what if thou, sweet May, hast known Mishap by worm and blight;

If expectations newly blown

Have perished in thy sight;

If loves and joys, while up they sprung, Were caught as in a snare;

Such is the lot of all the young,

However bright and fair.

Lo! Streams that April could not check Are patient of thy rule;

Gurgling in foamy water-break,

Loitering in glassy pool:

By thee, thee only, could be sent

Such gentle mists as glide,

Curling with unconfirmed intent,

On that green mountain's side.

How delicate the leafy veil

Through which yon house of God

Gleams 'mid the peace of this deep dale By few but shepherds trod!

And lowly huts, near beaten ways,

No sooner stand attired

In thy fresh wreaths, than they for praise Peep forth, and are admired.

Season of fancy and of hope,

Permit not for one hour,

A blossom from thy crown to drop,

Nor add to it a flower!

Keep, lovely May, as if by touch





Of self restraining art,

This modest charm of not too much,

Part seen, imagined part!

William Wordsworth





To My Sister

It is the first mild day of March:

Each minute sweeter than before

The redbreast sings from the tall larch That stands beside our door.

There is a blessing in the air,

Which seems a sense of joy to yield

To the bare trees, and mountains bare, And grass in the green field.

My sister! ('tis a wish of mine)

Now that our morning meal is done,

Make haste, your morning task resign; Come forth and feel the sun.

Edward will come with you;--and, pray, Put on with speed your woodland dress; And bring no book: for this one day

We'll give to idleness.

No joyless forms shall regulate

Our living calendar:

We from to-day, my Friend, will date

The opening of the year.

Love, now a universal birth,

From heart to heart is stealing,

From earth to man, from man to earth:

--It is the hour of feeling.

One moment now may give us more

Than years of toiling reason:

Our minds shall drink at every pore

The spirit of the season.

Some silent laws our hearts will make, Which they shall long obey:

We for the year to come may take

Our temper from to-day.

And from the blessed power that rolls About, below, above,

We'll frame the measure of our souls: They shall be tuned to love.

Then come, my Sister! come, I pray,

With speed put on your woodland dress; And bring no book: for this one day

We'll give to idleness.

William Wordsworth





To The Cuckoo

O BLITHE New-comer! I have heard,

I hear thee and rejoice.

O Cuckoo! Shall I call thee Bird,

Or but a wandering Voice?

While I am lying on the grass

Thy twofold shout I hear,

From hill to hill it seems to pass,

At once far off, and near.

Though babbling only to the Vale,

Of Sunshine and of flowers,

Thou bringest unto me a tale

Of visionary hours.

Thrice welcome, darling of the Spring!

Even yet thou art to me

No bird, but an invisible thing,

A voice, a mystery;

The same whom in my school-boy days

I listened to; that Cry

Which made me look a thousand ways

In bush, and tree, and sky.

To seek thee did I often rove

Through woods and on the green;

And thou wert still a hope, a love;

Still longed for, never seen.

And I can listen to thee yet;

Can lie upon the plain

And listen, till I do beget

That golden time again.

O blessed Bird! the earth we pace

Again appears to be

An unsubstantial, faery place;

That is fit home for Thee!

William Wordsworth





To The Daisy

IN youth from rock to rock I went

From hill to hill in discontent

Of pleasure high and turbulent,

Most pleased when most uneasy;

But now my own delights I make,---

Thirst at every rill can slake,

And gladly Nature's love partake,

Of Thee, sweet Daisy!

Thee Winter in the garland wears

That thinly decks his few gray hairs; Spring parts the clouds with softest airs, That she may sun thee;

Whole Summer-fields are thine by right; And Autumn, melancholy Wight!

Doth in thy crimson head delight

When rains are on thee.

In shoals and bands, a morrice train, Thou greet'st the traveller in the lane; Pleased at his greeting thee again;

Yet nothing daunted,

Nor grieved if thou be set at nought: And oft alone in nooks remote

We meet thee, like a pleasant thought, When such are wanted.

Be violets in their secret mews

The flowers the wanton Zephyrs choose; Proud be the rose, with rains and dew Her head impearling,

Thou liv'st with less ambitious aim,

Yet hast not gone without thy fame;

Thou art indeed by many a claim

The Poet's darling.

If to a rock from rain he fly,

Or, some bright day of April sky,

Imprisoned by hot sunshine lie

Near the green holly,

And wearily at length should fare;

He need but look about, and there

Thou art!---a friend at hand, to care His melancholy.

A hundred times, by rock or bower,

Ere thus I have lain couched an hour, Have I derived from thy sweet power

Some apprehension

Some steady love; some brief delight; Some memory that had taken flight;

Some chime of fancy wrong or right;





Of stray invention.

If stately passions in me burn,

And one chance look to Thee should turn, I drink out of an humbler urn

A lowlier pleasure;

The homely sympathy that heeds

The common life, our nature breeds;

A wisdom fitted to the needs

Of hearts at leisure.

Fresh-smitten by the morning ray,

When thou art up, alert and gay,

Then, cheerful Flower! my spirits play With kindred gladness:

And when, at dusk, by dews opprest

Thou sink'st, the image of thy rest

Hath often eased my pensive breast

Of careful sadness.

And all day long I number yet,

All seasons through, another debt,

Which I, wherever thou art met,

To thee am owing;

An instinct call it, a blind sense;

A happy, genial influence,

Coming one knows not how, nor whence, Nor whither going.

Child of the Year! that round dost run Thy pleasant course,---when day's begun As ready to salute the sun

As lark or leveret,

Thy long-lost praise thou shalt regain; Nor be less dear to future men

Than in old time;---thou not in vain

Art Nature's favourite.

William Wordsworth






BRIGHT Flower! whose home is everywhere, Bold in maternal Nature's care,

And all the long year through the heir Of joy or sorrow;

Methinks that there abides in thee

Some concord with humanity,

Given to no other flower I see

The forest thorough!

Is it that Man is soon deprest?

A thoughtless Thing! who, once unblest, Does little on his memory rest,

Or on his reason,

And Thou would'st teach him how to find A shelter under every wind,

A hope for times that are unkind

And every season?

Thou wander'st the wide world about,

Uncheck'd by pride or scrupulous doubt, With friend to greet thee, or without, Yet pleased and willing;

Meek, yielding to the occasion's call, And all things suffering from all,

Thy function apostolical

In peace fulfilling.

William Wordsworth





To The Daisy (first poem)

"Her divine skill taught me this, That from every thing I saw

I could some instruction draw,

And raise pleasure to the height

Through the meanest objects sight.

By the murmur of a spring,

Or the least bough's rustelling;

By a Daisy whose leaves spread

Shut when Titan goes to bed;

Or a shady bush or tree;

She could more infuse in me

Than all Nature's beauties can

In some other wiser man.'

G. Wither. * His muse.

IN youth from rock to rock I went,

From hill to hill in discontent

Of pleasure high and turbulent,

Most pleased when most uneasy;

But now my own delights I make,--

My thirst at every rill can slake,

And gladly Nature's love partake,

Of Thee, sweet Daisy!

Thee Winter in the garland wears

That thinly decks his few grey hairs; Spring parts the clouds with softest airs, That she may sun thee;

Whole Summer-fields are thine by right; And Autumn, melancholy Wight!

Doth in thy crimson head delight

When rains are on thee.

In shoals and bands, a morrice train, Thou greet'st the traveller in the lane; Pleased at his greeting thee again;

Yet nothing daunted,

Nor grieved if thou be set at nought: And oft alone in nooks remote

We meet thee, like a pleasant thought, When such are wanted.

Be violets in their secret mews

The flowers the wanton Zephyrs choose; Proud be the rose, with rains and dews Her head impearling,

Thou liv'st with less ambitious aim,

Yet hast not gone without thy fame;

Thou art indeed by many a claim

The Poet's darling.

If to a rock from rains he fly,





Or, some bright day of April sky,

Imprisoned by hot sunshine lie

Near the green holly,

And wearily at length should fare;

He needs but look about, and there

Thou art!--a friend at hand, to scare His melancholy.

A hundred times, by rock or bower,

Ere thus I have lain couched an hour, Have I derived from thy sweet power

Some apprehension;

Some steady love; some brief delight; Some memory that had taken flight;

Some chime of fancy wrong or right;

Or stray invention.

If stately passions in me burn,

And one chance look to Thee should turn, I drink out of an humbler urn

A lowlier pleasure;

The homely sympathy that heeds

The common life, our nature breeds;

A wisdom fitted to the needs

Of hearts at leisure.

Fresh-smitten by the morning ray,

When thou art up, alert and gay,

Then, cheerful Flower! my spirits play With kindred gladness:

And when, at dusk, by dews opprest

Thou sink'st, the image of thy rest

Hath often eased my pensive breast

Of careful sadness.

And all day long I number yet,

All seasons through, another debt,

Which I, wherever thou art met,

To thee am owing;

An instinct call it, a blind sense;

A happy, genial influence,

Coming one knows not how, nor whence, Nor whither going.

Child of the Year! that round dost run Thy pleasant course,--when day's begun As ready to salute the sun

As lark or leveret,

Thy long-lost praise thou shalt regain; Nor be less dear to future men

Than in old time;--thou not in vain

Art Nature's favourite.





William Wordsworth





To The Daisy (fourth poem)

Sweet Flower! belike one day to have

A place upon thy Poet's grave,

I welcome thee once more:

But He, who was on land, at sea,

My Brother, too, in loving thee,

Although he loved more silently,

Sleeps by his native shore.

Ah! hopeful, hopeful was the day

When to that Ship he bent his way,

To govern and to guide:

His wish was gained: a little time

Would bring him back in manhood's prime And free for life, these hills to climb; With all his wants supplied.

And full of hope day followed day

While that stout Ship at anchor lay

Beside the shores of Wight;

The May had then made all things green; And, floating there, in pomp serene,

That Ship was goodly to be seen,

His pride and his delight!

Yet then, when called ashore, he sought The tender peace of rural thought:

In more than happy mood

To your abodes, bright daisy Flowers!

He then would steal at leisure hours, And loved you glittering in your bowers A starry multitude.

But hark the word!--the ship is gone;--

Returns from her long course:--anon

Sets sail:--in season due,

Once more on English earth they stand: But, when a third time from the land

They parted, sorrow was at hand

For Him and for his crew.

Ill-fated Vessel!--ghastly shock!

--At length delivered from the rock,

The deep she hath regained;

And through the stormy night they steer; Labouring for life, in hope and fear, To reach a safer shore--how near,

Yet not to be attained!

"Silence!" the brave Commander cried: To that calm word a shriek replied,

It was the last death-shriek.

--A few (my soul oft sees that sight)





Survive upon the tall mast's height;

But one dear remnant of the night--

For Him in vain I seek.

Six weeks beneath the moving sea

He lay in slumber quietly;

Unforced by wind or wave

To quit the Ship for which he died,

(All claims of duty satisfied;)

And there they found him at her side; And bore him to the grave.

Vain service! yet not vainly done

For this, if other end were none,

That He, who had been cast

Upon a way of life unmeet

For such a gentle Soul and sweet,

Should find an undisturbed retreat

Near what he loved, at last--

That neighbourhood of grove and field To Him a resting-place should yield,

A meek man and a brave!

The birds shall sing and ocean make

A mournful murmur for 'his' sake;

And Thou, sweet Flower, shalt sleep and wake Upon his senseless grave.

William Wordsworth





To The Daisy (third poem)

Bright Flower! whose home is everywhere, Bold in maternal Nature's care,

And all the long year through the heir Of joy or sorrow;

Methinks that there abides in thee

Some concord with humanity,

Given to no other flower I see

The forest thorough!

Is it that Man is soon deprest?

A thoughtless Thing! who, once unblest, Does little on his memory rest,

Or on his reason,

And Thou would'st teach him how to find A shelter under every wind,

A hope for times that are unkind

And every season?

Thou wander'st the wide world about,

Uncheck'd by pride or scrupulous doubt, With friend to greet thee, or without, Yet pleased and willing;

Meek, yielding to the occasion's call, And all things suffering from all,

Thy function apostolical

In peace fulfilling.

William Wordsworth





To The Same Flower (second poem)

With little here to do or see

Of things that in the great world be, Daisy! again I talk to thee,

For thou art worthy,

Thou unassuming Common-place

Of Nature, with that homely face,

And yet with something of a grace,

Which Love makes for thee!

Oft on the dappled turf at ease

I sit, and play with similies,

Loose types of things through all degrees, Thoughts of thy raising:

And many a fond and idle name

I give to thee, for praise or blame,

As is the humour of the game,

While I am gazing.

A nun demure of lowly port;

Or sprightly maiden, of Love's court, In thy simplicity the sport

Of all temptations;

A queen in crown of rubies drest;

A starveling in a scanty vest;

Are all, as seems to suit thee best,

Thy appellations.

A little cyclops, with one eye

Staring to threaten and defy,

That thought comes next--and instantly The freak is over,

The shape will vanish--and behold

A silver shield with boss of gold,

That spreads itself, some faery bold

In fight to cover!

I see thee glittering from afar--

And then thou art a pretty star;

Not quite so fair as many are

In heaven above thee!

Yet like a star, with glittering crest, Self-poised in air thou seem'st to rest;--

May peace come never to his nest,

Who shall reprove thee!

Bright 'Flower'! for by that name at last, When all my reveries are past,

I call thee, and to that cleave fast, Sweet silent creature!

That breath'st with me in sun and air, Do thou, as thou art wont, repair

My heart with gladness, and a share





Of thy meek nature!

William Wordsworth





Two April Mornings, The

We walked along, while bright and red Uprose the morning sun;

And Matthew stopped, he looked, and said,

"The will of God be done!"

A village schoolmaster was he,

With hair of glittering grey;

As blithe a man as yon could see

On a spring holiday.

And on that morning, through the grass, And by the steaming rills,

We travelled merrily, to pass

A day among the hills.

"Our work," said I, "was well begun, Then, from thy breast what thought,

Beneath so beautiful a sun,

So sad a sigh has brought?"

A second time did Matthew stop;

And fixing still his eye

Upon the eastern mountain-top,

To me he made reply:

"Yon cloud with that long purple cleft Brings fresh into my mind

A day like this which I have left

Full thirty years behind.

"And just above yon slope of corn Such colours, and no other,

Were in the sky, that April morn,

Of this the very brother.

"With rod and line I sued the sport Which that sweet season gave,

And, to the church-yard come, stopped short Beside my daughter's grave.

"Nine summers had she scarcely seen, The pride of all the vale;

And then she sang;--she would have been A very nightingale.

"Six feet in earth my Emma lay;

And yet I loved her more,

For so it seemed, than till that day

I e'er had loved before.

"And, turning from her grave, I met, Beside the church-yard yew,





A blooming Girl, whose hair was wet

With points of morning dew.

"A basket on her head she bare;

Her brow was smooth and white:

To see a child so very fair,

It was a pure delight!

"No fountain from its rocky cave E'er tripped with foot so free;

She seemed as happy as a wave

That dances on the sea.

"There came from me a sigh of pain Which I could ill confine;

I looked at her, and looked again:

And did not wish her mine!"

Matthew is in his grave, yet now,

Methinks, I see him stand,

As at that moment, with a bough

Of wilding in his hand.

William Wordsworth





Two Thieves, The

O now that the genius of Bewick were mine, And the skill which he learned on the banks of the Tyne.

Then the Muses might deal with me just as they chose, For I'd take my last leave both of verse and of prose.

What feats would I work with my magical hand!

Book-learning and books should be banished the land: And, for hunger and thirst and such troublesome calls, Every ale-house should then have a feast on its walls.

The traveller would hang his wet clothes on a chair; Let them smoke, let them burn, not a straw would he care!

For the Prodigal Son, Joseph's Dream and his sheaves, Oh, what would they be to my tale of two Thieves?

The One, yet unbreeched, is not three birthdays old, His Grandsire that age more than thirty times told; There are ninety good seasons of fair and foul weather Between them, and both go a-pilfering together.

With chips is the carpenter strewing his floor?

Is a cart-load of turf at an old woman's door?

Old Daniel his hand to the treasure will slide!

And his Grandson's as busy at work by his side.

Old Daniel begins; he stops short--and his eye, Through the lost look of dotage, is cunning and sly:

'Tis a look which at this time is hardly his own, But tells a plain tale of the days that are flown.

He once had a heart which was moved by the wires Of manifold pleasures and many desires: And what if he cherished his purse? 'Twas no more Than treading a path trod by thousands before.

'Twas a path trod by thousands; but Daniel is one Who went something farther than others have gone, And now with old Daniel you see how it fares; You see to what end he has brought his grey hairs.

The pair sally forth hand in hand: ere the sun Has peered o'er the beeches, their work is begun: And yet, into whatever sin they may fall, This child but half knows it, and that, not at all.

They hunt through the streets with deliberate tread, And each, in his turn, becomes leader or led; And, wherever they carry their plots and their wiles, Every face in the village is dimpled with smiles.

Neither checked by the rich nor the needy they roam; For the grey-headed Sire has a daughter at home,





Who will gladly repair all the damage that's done; And three, were it asked, would be rendered for one.

Old Man! whom so oft I with pity have eyed, I love thee, and love the sweet Boy at thy side: Long yet may'st thou live! for a teacher we see That lifts up the veil of our nature in thee.

William Wordsworth





Upon Westminster Bridge

EARTH has not anything to show more fair: Dull would he be of soul who could pass by A sight so touching in its majesty:

This City now doth like a garment wear The beauty of the morning; silent, bare, Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie Open unto the fields, and to the sky; All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.

Never did sun more beautifully steep

In his first splendour valley, rock, or hill; Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!

The river glideth at his own sweet will: Dear God! the very houses seem asleep; And all that mighty heart is lying still!

William Wordsworth





Valedictory Sonnet to the River Duddon I THOUGHT of Thee, my partner and my guide, As being pass'd away.--Vain sympathies!

For, backward, Duddon! as I cast my eyes, I see what was, and is, and will abide; Still glides the Stream, and shall for ever glide; The Form remains, the Function never dies; While we, the brave, the mighty, and the wise, We Men, who in our morn of youth defied The elements, must vanish;--be it so!

Enough, if something from our hands have power To live, and act, and serve the future hour; And if, as toward the silent tomb we go, Through love, through hope, and faith's transcendent dower, We feel that we are greater than we know.

William Wordsworth





Waterfall and The Eglantine, The

"Begone, thou fond presumptuous Elf,"

Exclaimed an angry Voice,

"Nor dare to thrust thy foolish self Between me and my choice!"

A small Cascade fresh swoln with snows Thus threatened a poor Briar-rose,

That, all bespattered with his foam,

And dancing high and dancing low,

Was living, as a child might know,

In an unhappy home.

II

"Dost thou presume my course to block?

Off, off! or, puny Thing!

I'll hurl thee headlong with the rock To which thy fibres cling."

The Flood was tyrannous and strong;

The patient Briar suffered long,

Nor did he utter groan or sigh,

Hoping the danger would be past;

But, seeing no relief, at last,

He ventured to reply.

III

"Ah!" said the Briar, "blame me not; Why should we dwell in strife?

We who in this sequestered spot

Once lived a happy life!

You stirred me on my rocky bed--

What pleasure through my veins you spread The summer long, from day to day,

My leaves you freshened and bedewed;

Nor was it common gratitude

That did your cares repay.

IV

"When spring came on with bud and bell, Among these rocks did I

Before you hang my wreaths to tell

That gentle days were nigh!

And in the sultry summer hours,

I sheltered you with leaves and flowers; And in my leaves--now shed and gone,

The linnet lodged, and for us two

Chanted his pretty songs, when you

Had little voice or none.

V





"But now proud thoughts are in your breast--

What grief is mine you see,

Ah! would you think, even yet how blest Together we might be!

Though of both leaf and flower bereft, Some ornaments to me are left--

Rich store of scarlet hips is mine,

With which I, in my humble way,

Would deck you many a winter day,

A happy Eglantine!"

VI

What more he said I cannot tell,

The Torrent down the rocky dell

Came thundering loud and fast;

I listened, nor aught else could hear; The Briar quaked--and much I fear

Those accents were his last.

William Wordsworth





We are Seven

--------A Simple Child,

That lightly draws its breath,

And feels its life in every limb,

What should it know of death?

I met a little cottage Girl:

She was eight years old, she said;

Her hair was thick with many a curl

That clustered round her head.

She had a rustic, woodland air,

And she was wildly clad:

Her eyes were fair, and very fair;

--Her beauty made me glad.

"Sisters and brothers, little Maid, How many may you be?"

"How many? Seven in all," she said And wondering looked at me.

"And where are they? I pray you tell."

She answered, "Seven are we;

And two of us at Conway dwell,

And two are gone to sea.

"Two of us in the church-yard lie, My sister and my brother;

And, in the church-yard cottage, I

Dwell near them with my mother."

"You say that two at Conway dwell, And two are gone to sea,

Yet ye are seven!--I pray you tell,

Sweet Maid, how this may be."

Then did the little Maid reply,

"Seven boys and girls are we;

Two of us in the church-yard lie,

Beneath the church-yard tree."

"You run about, my little Maid,

Your limbs they are alive;

If two are in the church-yard laid,

Then ye are only five."

"Their graves are green, they may be seen,"

The little Maid replied,

"Twelve steps or more from my mother's door, And they are side by side.

"My stockings there I often knit, My kerchief there I hem;





And there upon the ground I sit,

And sing a song to them.

"And often after sunset, Sir,

When it is light and fair,

I take my little porringer,

And eat my supper there.

"The first that died was sister Jane; In bed she moaning lay,

Till God released her of her pain;

And then she went away.

"So in the church-yard she was laid; And, when the grass was dry,

Together round her grave we played,

My brother John and I.

"And when the ground was white with snow, And I could run and slide,

My brother John was forced to go,

And he lies by her side."

"How many are you, then," said I,

"If they two are in heaven?"

Quick was the little Maid's reply,

"O Master! we are seven."

"But they are dead; those two are dead!

Their spirits are in heaven!"

'Twas throwing words away; for still

The little Maid would have her will,

And said, "Nay, we are seven!"

William Wordsworth





Wishing-gate, The

Hope rules a land forever green:

All powers that serve the bright-eyed Queen Are confident and gay;

Clouds at her bidding disappear;

Points she to aught?---the bliss draws near, And Fancy smooths the way.

Not such the land of Wishes---there

Dwell fruitless day-dreams, lawless prayer, And thoughts with things at strife;

Yet how forlorn, should ye depart

Ye superstitions of the heart,

How poor, were human life!

When magic lore abjured its might,

Ye did not forfeit one dear right,

One tender claim abate;

Witness this symbol of your sway,

Surnving near the public way,

The rustic Wishing-gate!

Inquire not if the faery race

Shed kindly influence on the place,

Ere northward they retired;

If here a warrior left a spell,

Panting for glory as he fell;

Or here a saint expired.

Enough that all arouud is fair,

Composed with Nature's finest care,

And in her fondest love---

Peace to embosom and content---

To overawe the turbulent,

The selfish to reprove.

Yea! even the Stranger from afar,

Reclining on this moss-grown bar,

Unknowing, and unknown,

The infection of the ground partakes, Longing for his Beloved---who maker

All happiness her own.

Then why should conscious Spirits fear The mystic stirrings that are here,

The ancient faith disclaim?

The local Genius ne'er befriends

Desires whose course in folly ends,

Whose just reward is shame.

Smile if thou wilt, but not in scorn, If some, by ceaseless pains outworn,

Here crave an easier lot;





If some have thirsted to renew

A broken vow, or bind a true,

With firmer, holier knot.

And not in vain, when thoughts are cast Upon the irrevocable past,

Some Penitent sincere

May for a worthier future sigh,

While trickles from his downcast eye

No unavailing tear.

The Worldling, pining to be freed

From turmoil, who would turn or speed The current of his fate,

Might stop before this favored scene, At Nature's call, nor blush to lean

Upon the Wishing-gate.

The Sage, who feels how blind, how weak Is man, though loth such help to seek, Yet, passing, here might pause,

And thirst for insight to allay

Misgiving, while the crimson day

In quietness withdraws;

Or when the church-clock's knell profound To Time's first step across the bound Of midnight makes reply;

Time pressing on with starry crest,

To filial sleep upon the breast

Of dread eternity.

William Wordsworth





With How Sad Steps, O Moon, Thou Climb'st the Sky With how sad steps, O Moon, thou climb'st the sky,

"How silently, and with how wan a face!"

Where art thou? Thou so often seen on high Running among the clouds a Wood-nymph's race!

Unhappy Nuns, whose common breath's a sigh Which they would stifle, move at such a pace!

The northern Wind, to call thee to the chase, Must blow to-night his bugle horn. Had I The power of Merlin, Goddess! this should be: And all the stars, fast as the clouds were riven, Should sally forth, to keep thee company, Hurrying and sparkling through the clear blue heaven.

But, Cynthia! should to thee the palm be given, Queen both for beauty and for majesty.

William Wordsworth





With ships the sea was sprinkled

WITH ships the sea was sprinkled far and nigh, Like stars in heaven, and joyously it showed; Some lying fast at anchor in the road, Some veering up and down, one knew not why.

A goodly vessel did I then espy

Come like a giant from a haven broad; And lustily along the bay she strode, Her tackling rich, and of apparel high.

The ship was nought to me, nor I to her, Yet I pursued her with a lover's look; This ship to all the rest did I prefer: When will she turn, and whither? She will brook No tarrying; where she comes the winds must stir: On went she, and due north her journey took.

William Wordsworth





With Ships the Sea was Sprinkled Far and Nigh With ships the sea was sprinkled far and nigh, Like stars in heaven, and joyously it showed; Some lying fast at anchor in the road, Some veering up and down, one knew not why.

A goodly vessel did I then espy

Come like a giant from a haven broad; And lustily along the bay she strode, Her tackling rich, and of apparel high.

The ship was nought to me, nor I to her, Yet I pursued her with a lover's look; This ship to all the rest did I prefer: When will she turn, and whither? She will brook No tarrying; where she comes the winds must stir: On went she, and due north her journey took.

William Wordsworth





Written in Early Spring

I heard a thousand blended notes

While in a grove I sat reclined,

In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts Bring sad thoughts to the mind.

To her fair works did Nature link

The human soul that through me ran;

And much it grieved my heart to think What Man has made of Man.

Through primrose tufts, in that sweet bower, The periwinkle trailed its wreaths;

And 'tis my faith that every flower

Enjoys the air it breathes.

The birds around me hopped and played, Their thoughts I cannot measure -

But the least motion which they made

It seemed a thrill of pleasure.

The budding twigs spread out their fan To catch the breezy air;

And I must think, do all I can,

That there was pleasure there.

If this belief from heaven be sent,

If such be Nature's holy plan,

Have I not reason to lament

What Man has made of Man?

William Wordsworth





Written in Germany, On One of The Coldest Days Of The Century A plague on your languages, German and Norse!

Let me have the song of the kettle;

And the tongs and the poker, instead of that horse That gallops away with such fury and force On this dreary dull plate of black metal.

See that Fly,--a disconsolate creature! perhaps A child of the field or the grove;

And, sorrow for him! the dull treacherous heat Has seduced the poor fool from his winter retreat, And he creeps to the edge of my stove.

Alas! how he fumbles about the domains Which this comfortless oven environ!

He cannot find out in what track he must crawl, Now back to the tiles, then in search of the wall, And now on the brink of the iron.

Stock-still there he stands like a traveller bemazed: The best of his skill he has tried;

His feelers, methinks, I can see him put forth To the east and the west, to the south and the north; But he finds neither guide-post nor guide.

His spindles sink under him, foot, leg, and thigh!

His eyesight and hearing are lost;

Between life and death his blood freezes and thaws; And his two pretty pinions of blue dusky gauze Are glued to his sides by the frost.

No brother, no mate has he near him--while I Can draw warmth from the cheek of my Love; As blest and as glad, in this desolate gloom, As if green summer grass were the floor of my room, And woodbines were hanging above.

Yet, God is my witness, thou small helpless Thing!

Thy life I would gladly sustain

Till summer come up from the south, and with crowds Of thy brethren a march thou should'st sound through the clouds, And back to the forests again!

William Wordsworth






. O Friend! I know not which way I must look For comfort, being, as I am, opprest, To think that now our life is only drest For show; mean handy-work of craftsman, cook, Or groom! -- We must run glittering like a brook In the open sunshine, or we are unblest: The wealthiest man among us is the best: No grandeur now in nature or in book

Delights us. Rapine, avarice, expense, This is idolatry; and these we adore: Plain living and high thinking are no more: The homely beauty of the good old cause Is gone; our peace, our fearful innocence, And pure religion breathing household laws.

William Wordsworth





Written in March

The cock is crowing,

The stream is flowing,

The small birds twitter,

The lake doth glitter

The green field sleeps in the sun;

The oldest and youngest

Are at work with the strongest;

The cattle are grazing,

Their heads never raising;

There are forty feeding like one!

Like an army defeated

The snow hath retreated,

And now doth fare ill

On the top of the bare hill;

The plowboy is whooping- anon-anon:

There's joy in the mountains;

There's life in the fountains;

Small clouds are sailing,

Blue sky prevailing;

The rain is over and gone!

William Wordsworth





Written With a Pencil Upon a Stone In The Wall of The House, On The Island at Grasmere

Rude is this Edifice, and Thou hast seen Buildings, albeit rude, that have maintained Proportions more harmonious, and approached To closer fellowship with ideal grace.

But take it in good part:--alas! the poor Vitruvius of our village had no help

From the great City; never, upon leaves Of red Morocco folio, saw displayed,

In long succession, pre-existing ghosts Of Beauties yet unborn--the rustic Lodge Antique, and Cottage with verandah graced, Nor lacking, for fit company, alcove, Green-house, shell-grot, and moss-lined hermitage.

Thou see'st a homely Pile, yet to these walls The heifer comes in the snow-storm, and here The new-dropped lamb finds shelter from the wind.

And hither does one Poet sometimes row His pinnace, a small vagrant barge, up-piled With plenteous store of heath and withered fern, (A lading which he with his sickle cuts, Among the mountains) and beneath this roof He makes his summer couch, and here at noon Spreads out his limbs, while, yet unshorn, the Sheep, Panting beneath the burthen of their wool, Lie round him, even as if they were a part Of his own Household: nor, while from his bed He looks, through the open door-place, toward the lake And to the stirring breezes, does he want Creations lovely as the work of sleep--

Fair sights, and visions of romantic joy!

William Wordsworth





Yarrow Revisited

. The gallant Youth, who may have gained, Or seeks, a "winsome Marrow,"

Was but an Infant in the lap

When first I looked on Yarrow;

Once more, by Newark's Castle-gate

Long left without a warder,

I stood, looked, listened, and with Thee, Great Minstrel of the Border!

Grave thoughts ruled wide on that sweet day, Their dignity installing

In gentle bosoms, while sere leaves

Were on the bough, or falling;

But breezes played, and sunshine gleamed-The forest to embolden;

Reddened the fiery hues, and shot

Transparence through the golden.

For busy thoughts the Stream flowed on In foamy agitation;

And slept in many a crystal pool

For quiet contemplation:

No public and no private care

The freeborn mind enthralling,

We made a day of happy hours,

Our happy days recalling.

Brisk Youth appeared, the Morn of youth, With freaks of graceful folly,-

Life's temperate Noon, her sober Eve, Her Night not melancholy;

Past, present, future, all appeared

In harmony united,

Like guests that meet, and some from far, By cordial love invited.

And if, as Yarrow, through the woods

And down the meadow ranging,

Did meet us with unaltered face,

Though we were changed and changing;

If, then, some natural shadows spread Our inward prospect over,

The soul's deep valley was not slow

Its brightness to recover.

Eternal blessings on the Muse,

And her divine employment!

The blameless Muse, who trains her Sons For hope and calm enjoyment;

Albeit sickness, lingering yet,

Has o'er their pillow brooded;

And Care waylays their steps-a Sprite Not easily eluded.





For thee, O Scott! compelled to change Green Eildon-hill and Cheviot

For warm Vesuvio's vine-clad slopes;

And leave thy Tweed and Tiviot

For mild Sorrento's breezy waves;

May classic Fancy, linking

With native Fancy her fresh aid,

Preserve thy heart from sinking!

Oh! while they minister to thee,

Each vying with the other,

May Health return to mellow Age

With Strength, her venturous brother; And Tiber, and each brook and rill

Renowned in song and story,

With unimagined beauty shine,

Nor lose one ray of glory!

For Thou, upon a hundred streams,

By tales of love and sorrow,

Of faithful love, undaunted truth

Hast shed the power of Yarrow;

And streams unknown, hills yet unseen, Wherever they invite Thee,

At parent Nature's grateful call,

With gladness must requite Thee.

A gracious welcome shall be thine,

Such looks of love and honour

As thy own Yarrow gave to me

When first I gazed upon her;

Beheld what I had feared to see,

Unwilling to surrender

Dreams treasured up from early days,

The holy and the tender.

And what, for this frail world, were all That mortals do or suffer,

Did no responsive harp, no pen,

Memorial tribute offer?

Yea, what were mighty Nature's self?

Her features, could they win us,

Unhelped by the poetic voice

That hourly speaks within us?

Nor deem that localized Romance

Plays false with our affections;

Unsanctifies our tears-made sport

For fanciful dejections:

Ah, no! the visions of the past

Sustain the heart in feeling





Life as she is-our changeful Life,

With friends and kindred dealing.

Bear witness, Ye, whose thoughts that day In Yarrow's groves were centred;

Who through the silent portal arch

Of mouldering Newark entered;

And clomb the winding stair that once Too timidly was mounted

By the "last Minstrel,"(not the last!) Ere he his Tale recounted.

Flow on for ever, Yarrow Stream!

Fulfil thy pensive duty,

Well pleased that future Bards should chant For simple hearts thy beauty;

To dream-light dear while yet unseen, Dear to the common sunshine,

And dearer still, as now I feel,

To memory's shadowy moonshine!

William Wordsworth





Yarrow Unvisited

. From Stirling castle we had seen

The mazy Forth unravelled;

Had trod the banks of Clyde, and Tay, And with the Tweed had travelled;

And when we came to Clovenford,

Then said my "winsome Marrow ,"

"Whate'er betide, we'll turn aside, And see the Braes of Yarrow."

"Let Yarrow folk, frae Selkirk town, Who have been buying, selling,

Go back to Yarrow, 'tis their own;

Each maiden to her dwelling!

On Yarrow's banks let her herons feed, Hares couch, and rabbits burrow!

But we will downward with the Tweed

Nor turn aside to Yarrow.

"There's Galla Water, Leader Haughs, Both lying right before us;

And Dryborough, where with chiming Tweed The lintwhites sing in chorus;

There's pleasant Tiviot-dale, a land

Made blithe with plough and harrow:

Why throw away a needful day

To go in search of Yarrow?

"What's Yarrow but a river bare, That glides the dark hills under?

There are a thousand such elsewhere

As worthy of your wonder."

--Strange words they seemed of slight and scorn; My True-love sighed for sorrow;

And looked me in the face, to think

I thus could speak of Yarrow!

"Oh! green," said I, "are Yarrow's holms, And sweet is Yarrow flowing!

Fair hangs the apple frae the rock,

But we will leave it growing.

O'er hilly path, and open Strath,

We'll wander Scotland thorough;

But, though so near, we will not turn Into the dale of Yarrow.

"Let beeves and home-bred kine partake The sweets of Burn-mill meadow,

The swan on still St. Mary's Lake

Float double, swan and shadow!

We will not see them; will not go,

To-day, nor yet to-morrow;

Enough if in our hearts we know

There's such a place as Yarrow.





"Be Yarrow stream unseen, unknown!

It must, or we shall rue it:

We have a vision of our own;

Ah! why should we undo it?

The treasured dreams of times long past, We'll keep them, winsome Marrow!

For when we'er there, although 'tis fair,

'Twill be another Yarrow!

"If Care with freezing years should come, And wandering seem but folly,--

Should we be loth to stir from home,

And yet be melancholy;

Should life be dull, and spirits low,

'Twill soothe us in our sorrow,

That earth has something yet to show, The bonny holms of Yarrow!"

William Wordsworth





Yarrow Visited


And is this -Yarrow? -This the stream Of which my fancy cherished

So faithfully, a waking dream,

An image that hath perished?

O that some minstrel's harp were near To utter notes of gladness

And chase this silence from the air,

That fills my heart with sadness!

Yet why? -a silvery current flows

With uncontrolled meanderings;

Nor have these eyes by greener hills

Been soothed, in all my wanderings.

And, through her depths, Saint Mary's Lake Is visibly delighted;

For not a feature of those hills

Is in the mirror slighted.

A blue sky bends o'er Yarrow Vale,

Save where that pearly whiteness

Is round the rising sun diffused,

A tender hazy brightness;

Mild dawn of promise! that excludes

All profitless dejection;

Though not unwilling here to admit

A pensive recollection.

Where was it that the famous Flower

Of Yarrow Vale lay bleeding?

His bed perchance was yon smooth mound On which the herd is feeding:

And haply from this crystal pool,

Now peaceful as the morning,

The Water-wraith ascended thrice,

And gave his doleful warning.

Delicious is the Lay that sings

The haunts of happy lovers,

The path that leads them to the grove, The leafy grove that covers:

And pity sanctifies the verse

That paints, by strength of sorrow,

The unconquerable strength of love;

Bear witness, rueful Yarrow!

But thou that didst appear so fair

To fond imagination,

Dost rival in the light of day

Her delicate creation:

Meek loveliness is round thee spread,





A softness still and holy:

The grace of forest charms decayed,

And pastoral melancholy.

That region left, the vale unfolds

Rich groves of lofty stature,

With Yarrow winding through the pomp

Of cultivated nature;

And rising from those lofty groves

Behold a ruin hoary,

The shattered front of Newark's Towers, Renowned in Border story.

Fair scenes for childhood's opening bloom, For sportive youth to stray in,

For manhood to enjoy his strength,

And age to wear away in!

Yon cottage seems a bower of bliss,

A covert for protection

Of tender thoughts, that nestle there -

The brood of chaste affection.

How sweeet on this autumnal day

The wild-wood fruits to gather,

And on my true-love's forehead plant

A crest of blooming heather!

And what if I enwreathed my own?

'Twere no offence to reason;

The sober hills thus deck their brows To meet the wintry season.

I see -but not by sight alone,

Loved Yarrow, have I won thee;

A ray of Fancy still survives -

Her sunshine plays upon thee!

Thy ever-youthful waters keep

A course of lively pleasure;

And gladsome notes my lips can breathe Accordant to the measure.

The vapours linger round the heights, They melt, and soon must vanish;

One hour is theirs, nor more is mine -

Sad thought! which I would banish,

But that I know, where'er I go,

Thy genuine image, Yarrow!

Will dwell with me -to heighten joy,

And cheer my mind in sorrow.

William Wordsworth







Document Outline


Table of Contents COVER

BIOGRAPHY

"A Narrow Girdle of Rough Stones and Crags,"

"A Whirl-Blast from Behind the Hill"

"Calm is all Nature as a Resting Wheel."

"I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud"

"It was an April morning: fresh and clear"

"She Dwelt Among Untrodden Ways"

"She Was a Phantom of Delight"

"Strange Fits of Passion Have I Known"

"Surprised by Joy--Impatient as the Wind"

"The World Is To Much With Us; Late and Soon"

"There is an Eminence,--of these our hills"

"Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower,"

"'Tis Said, That Some Have Died For Love"

"With Ships the Sea was Sprinkled Far and Nigh,"

A Character

A Complaint

A Narrow Girdle of Rough Stones and Crags,

A Night Thought

A Night-Piece

A Poet! He Hath Put his Heart to School

A Poet's Epitaph

A Slumber Did My Spirit Seal

A Whirl-Blast from Behind the Hill

A Wren's Nest

Address To The Scholars Of The Village School Of ----

After-Thought

An Evening Walk, Addressed to a Young Lady

Andrew Jones

Anecdote For Fathers

Animal Tranquility and Decay

Animal Tranquillity and Decay

Birth of Love, The

Brothers, The

By the Seaside

Calm is all Nature as a Resting Wheel.

Character of the Happy Warrior

Childless Father, The

Complaint Of a Forsaken Indian Woman, The

Composed During a Storm

Composed Upon Westminster Bridge


Daffodils

Danish Boy, The: A Fragment

Desideria

Dion

Elegiac Stanzas

Elegiac Stanzas Suggested by a Picture of Peele Castle

Ellen Irwin

England i

England ii

England iii

England iv

England v

Evening on Calais Beach

Expostulation and Reply

Extempore Effusion upon the Death of James Hogg

For The Spot Where The Hermitage Stood on St. Herbert's Island, Derwentwater.

Foresight

Forsaken, The

Fountain, The: A Conversation

Goody Blake and Harry Gill

Green Linnet, The

Guilt and Sorrow

Hart-Leap Well

Her Eyes are Wild

I Know an Old Man Constrained to Dwell

I Travelled Among Unknown Men

I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud

'I wandered lonely as a cloud...'

Idiot Boy, The

Idle Shepherd Boys, The

Influence of Natural Objects

Inscriptions Written with a Slate Pencil upon a Stone

Inside of King's College Chapel, Cambridge

It Is a Beauteous Evening

It is not to be Thought of

It was an April morning: fresh and clear

Kitten And Falling Leaves, The

Lament Of Mary Queen Of Scots

Lament of Mary Queen of Scots, on The Eve of a New Year

Laodamia

Last of The Flock, The

Lines composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey

Lines Left upon a Seat in a Yew-tree

Lines written as a School Exercise at Hawkshead, Anno Aetatis

Lines Written In Early Spring


Lucy Gray

Lucy i

Lucy ii

Lucy iii

Lucy iv

Lucy v

Memory

Michael: A Pastoral Poem

Most Sweet it is

Mother's Return, The

Mutability

My Heart Leaps Up


Nuns Fret Not at Their Convent's Narrow Room

Nutting

O Nightingale! Thou Surely Art

Oak and The Broom, The: A Pastoral Poem


Ode Composed On A May Morning

Ode On Intimations Of Immortality

Ode on Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood

Ode to Duty

Ode, Composed On A May Morning

Ode, Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood

Ode, On Intimations Of Immortality

Ode: Intimations of Immortality

Old Cumberland Beggar, The

On the Departure of Sir Walter Scott from Abbotsford

On the Extinction of the Venetian Republic

Perfect Woman

Peter Bell, A Tale

Pet-Lamb, The: A Pastoral Poem

Rainbow, The

Remembrance of Collins

Resolution and Independence

Reverie of Poor Susan, The

Rural Architecture

Russian Fugitive, The

Ruth

Sailor's Mother, The

Scorn Not the Sonnet


Seven Sisters, The

She Dwelt Among the Untrodden Ways

She Dwelt Among Untrodden Ways

She Was a Phantom of Delight

Simon Lee, The Old Huntsman

Simon Lee: The Old Huntsman

Simplon Pass, The

Solitary Reaper, The

Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle upon the Restoration o

Song For The Wandering Jew

Sparrow's Nest, The

Speak!

Stanzas

Stepping Westward

Strange Fits Of Passion

Strange Fits of Passion Have I Known

Surprised by Joy

Table Turned, The

The Complaint Of a Forsaken Indian Woman

The Forsaken

The Fountain

The French Revolution as it appeared to Enthusiasts

The Green Linnet

The Idle Shepherd Boys

The Kitten And Falling Leaves

The Longest Day

The Mother's Return

The Old Cumberland Beggar

The Power of Armies Is a Visible Thing



The Prelude. (book V )

The Primrose of the Rock

The Rainbow

The Reaper

The Reverie of Poor Susan

The Russian Fugitive

The Sailor's Mother

The Seven Sisters

The Shepherd, Looking Eastward, Softly Said

The Simplon Pass

The Solitary Reaper

The Sonnet i

The Sonnet ii

The Sparrow's Nest

The Sun Has Long Been Set

The Tables Turned

The Trosachs

The Two April Mornings

The Virgin

The Wishing Gate

The World

The World Is To Much With Us

The World is Too Much With Us

The world is too much with us; late and soon

There is an Eminence,--of these our hills

There was a Boy

Thorn, The

Three Years She Grew

Three Years She Grew in Sun and Shower,

'Tis Said, That Some Have Died For Love

To A Butterfly


To A Butterfly (first poem)

To A Butterfly (second poem)

To a Highland Girl (At Inversneyde, upon Loch Lomond)

To A Sexton

To a Skylark

To a Sky-Lark

To Joanna

To M.H.

To May

To My Sister

To The Cuckoo

To The Daisy


To The Daisy (first poem)

To The Daisy (fourth poem)

To The Daisy (third poem)

To The Same Flower (second poem)

Two April Mornings, The

Two Thieves, The

Upon Westminster Bridge

Valedictory Sonnet to the River Duddon

Waterfall and The Eglantine, The

We are Seven

Wishing-gate, The

With How Sad Steps, O Moon, Thou Climb'st the Sky

With ships the sea was sprinkled

With Ships the Sea was Sprinkled Far and Nigh

Written in Early Spring

Written in Germany, On One of The Coldest Days Of The Century


Written in March

Written With a Pencil Upon a Stone In The Wall of The House, On The Island at Grasmere

Yarrow Revisited

Yarrow Unvisited

Yarrow Visited





